Baths is the solo project of Will Wiesenfeld, and this is his debut under the pseudonym. But "Cerulean" isn't Baths' first rodeo, under different names Will has released music before, some ambient stuff under the name Geotic and some electro acoustic fusions under the name [Post-foetus]. It's the same guy, but Baths is a very different animal. And in some respects, more straightforward than Will's other work, with lots of chunky, catchy hip-hop beats and easygoing melodies.

But there's a difficult side of this music too, an experimental side, lots of psychedelic effects, lots of pitch shifting, echoes, falsetto vocals and lots of unexplained noises and sounds colouring the background of these tracks. In some ways it reminds me of Toro y Moi's last album "Causers of This", except better. And for those of you who are actually into the last The Books LP, there's quite a bit of acoustic instrumentation and vocal samples on here too. There's a lady talking about essence, there's screaming kids, it's all here.

But back to the instrumentation, if you're a beat man, or woman, if you love a bassy, crunchy, crispy, beefy beat, then this thing is not just gonna be your bread, it's gonna be your butter too. Let's say it's not surprising that Baths debuted on the label "anticon", a San Francisco outfit whose artists pretty much specialize in left-field beat making. Even though this is Baths first LP for "anticon", the creativity, the eccentricity of this album rivals that of some of the heavy hitters on "anticon", like Tobacco, Dosh and even Odd Nosdam.

There are a real range of sounds on these tracks too. Some beats like on the opening "Apologetic Shoulder Blades" sound off-kilter, like a sputtering engine trying to get started. And the track "♥" is actually a piano powered thud bap ballad with a straightforward song structure and a nice melody. It's possibly the closest this thing comes to turning out into a pop song.

And there are some moments on this LP that are very-very easy on the ears, with lots of airy synths just floating in the background and the edge is taken off the beat in order to sort of make it more ambient, a little softer and just relaxing.

Yes, I have a gripe. Sometimes the falsetto vocals on this thing can tear off my ears. Sometimes it's okay, but other times it's not. Like on the track "You're My Excuse to Travel", not digging it, not just because the falsetto vocals that I'm just on the fence with are on the track, but they're multi-tracked, so it's like listening to several copies of something that I don't like, layered over one another into a musical casserole.

But not all the tracks are done in that high-pitched manner. "Cerulean" was a little bit of a rollercoaster for me, a couple huge dips in my enjoyment. Most of the tracks were fantastic, I love the creativity of this record, it's about as fun as playing with LEGOs (if you like playing with LEGOs). It's got lots of personality, lots of interesting sounds, tons and tons of color. And only a few moments that to me sort of felt like unfinished ideas.

LIGHT 8
