Tim Hecker is an electronic and ambient music producer hailing from Canada. This is his seventh studio LP under his own name and for me a very highly anticipated return from his fantastic 2011 album “Ravedeath, 1972”. And on this LP tends typical blend of ambient music, noise and drone, got a bit more textured, a bit more layered, piano really took over on this album in a big way and it felt here more than on other Hecker releases that the instrumentation was kind of live in the moment. Not only that, but all of the sounds combined on this record added up into a very post-apocalyptic vibe. It's a great LP, if you haven't heard it go listen to it. And with this new album, though “Ravedeath” did get a bunch of hype when it first came out, it is really a highly praised album, I think Tim has hit it out of the park once again right here. Once again, Tim is ambitious with his layers, his sound play, with his instrumentation with creating a somewhat live feel with the instruments on this record. But the instrumentation here seems so much less bleak and wandering than on Tim's past few releases.

Even though “Virgins” has plenty of soft and sparse moments on its tracks, I think this is actually one of Tim's more direct albums. A lot of the tracks here are actually quite busy with sound and don't take too long to start, don't take too long to build, I wouldn't exactly call it fast paced, but it definitely is one of Hecker's more tightly composed efforts. But that just speaks to the structure of this album, as far as the instrumentation goes, of course you have piano returning on this record, you have harmonium on many tracks here as well what feels like a few different synthesizers and maybe some woodwinds that could just be more harmonium. And it feels like Tim played out, planned out, wrote, composed some music for a variety of different tracks here, but he grabs the instrumentation or the performances that he made and he reverses parts of them, he loops them, he chops them, he swirls them and layers them and scatters them.

Tim manipulates a lot of the instrumentation on this record, very heavily and yet it doesn't really lose that live-in-the-moment feel that you would get if you were just listening to a quartet or some kind of instrumental music ensemble. Not only that, but Tim just layers piece of instrumentation on top of piece of instrumentation to the point where a lot of these compositions end up feeling a bit like drones. And even though these very heavy thick layers may feel a little impenetrable sonically because of just how large and wide they are, there are very beautiful melodies and interesting chord progressions that peak through it all to those who are attentive and sort of focused on what's going on. Tim Hecker usually approaches his records with an eye on the bigger picture and how the record sounds as a whole and “Virgins” is no different.

However, even though this album really feels like it was created from a holistic standpoint, there is a bit of a disjointed and fractured aesthetic to a lot of the music on this LP, as if a lot of what the listener is hearing is being conjured through some kind of distant idea or memory. And to me that comes through on just how cloudy and muddled the melodies can be sometimes with the instrumentation being layered on so heavily, so cacophonously, but the sounds and the emotions on here though are so vivid. This record could really put a dent in the happiest of days. But I think Tim Hecker goes about that melancholy in a slightly different, in a slightly cleaner way.

The way this LP starts with the track “Prism” with an incredibly bright drone, so bright it's just like staring into the sun. There are these weird shots of reverse piano playing throughout the track too and the song just grows more and more cacophonous and eventually gives away to the splintered pianos that are layered throughout the second track on here “Virginal I”, where it feels like Tim Hecker is indulging in a little bit of piano minimalism in a bit of modern classical, he's just grabbing this one piano piece which it could be from a bunch of different takes and he's just placing them on top of one another to the point where it feels like you're listening to this piano being played within a hall of mirrors, it's like you're hearing a repeat of the same piano phrasing being played again and again with slight variations on top of one another to the point where it's really dizzying, it's an amazing and kind of creative effect. And the song just grows heavier and heavier and eventually coasts down really beautifully toward the finish. We also get a little piano part playing toward the end of this track that is cut off that foreshadows to another song around the middle point of this album.

The next song on here “Radiance” is another very bright drone and kind of a sad melancholy post-rock-esque footnote on this album that feels like a bit of a transitionary track. Not really surprised to kind of see some post-rock influence on this album, considering that Tim Hecker recorded his last EP with the infamous Hotel2Tango recording studio. The first incredibly noisy moment to pop up on this LP is the track “Live Room”, where you get the same fractured piano approach, but playing a different phrase and it's matched up with these incredibly heavy bassy ways of distortion that kind of sound like you're listening to the last dying breath of some kind of about to break synthesizer. And even though it's a really ugly sound, there's something very beautiful and final about this track too, especially as Tim starts swirling and wrapping and surrounding all of these ugly and ethereal sounds with some really beautiful synth keys.

“Live Room Out” is a very touching closer to this track and then you have “Virginal II”, which kind of takes that piano phrase from “Virginal I”, but goes in a different direction with it, I like that Tim has these recurring themes on his album, he can grab melodies from previous tracks and reworked them in a way that sounds fresh. And even though Tim is really great at layering and recycling and reusing and manipulating, one of the most stunning tracks on this album is maybe one of the most bare too “Black Refraction”.

Now, after this point in the LP I actually feel like the album hits a bit of a lull, not a bad way but most of the very heavy and structured compositions on this album are doled out in the first half, a lot of the songs on this second part of the album are a bit shorter. Like the song “Incense at Abu Ghraib”, which only really feels like an introductory moment to the next track on here “Amps, Drugs, Harmonium”. Both of these songs consist of very chilling harmonium passages and I like that Tim is able to pull such coherent songs together, especially on “Amps, Drugs, Harmonium” with what feels like just a bunch of pieces of harmonium playing, maybe a sound collage or sorts. My only disappointment with this track though is just how suddenly it kind of drops out and finishes. Again, I feel like that's Tim sort of shooting for that typically fractured feel that he likes some of his songs to have, but it's really only so appealing to me if it's getting in the way of the feel or killing the vibe of the song or just sort of the mood that has been building up.

The closer on here though, “Stab Variation”, is maybe the most damaged sounding and psychedelic instrumental on this entire LP, taking some of the distortion from “Stigmata I” and some of the heavy percussion what feels like percussion just rumbles kicks in the lower end of the mix from “Stigmata II” and bringing them together with a really big epic climax for an artist whose music is constantly tagged as being “ambient”. This finish is really explosive.

I really am in love with most of the tracks on this LP and even the songs, the tracks that I'm not head-over-heels for by themselves, I see them having a very important part being played inside of this album as kind of a transition or just a moment where we're moving from point A to point B or you're changing the mood. For an album that is so short just, like 47 minutes long, it feels much longer. This LP really is a very hefty journey. And a journey that is incredibly well recorded, fine tuned, colorful, at times meticulously composed and at other moments very vast and open, and no matter how busy or sparse this album is, it always comes off as beautiful and fantastic.

LIGHT 9
