Future of the Left is a very cheeky experimental rock band hailing from the UK, and this is their fourth full-length album. And unfortunately, they're one of those bands that is slightly haunted by the successes of their past, or more specifically the successes of guitarist and vocalist Andrew Falkous who was actually in a band preceding Future of the Left called Mclusky, he used to front them as well, and they dropped a couple pretty essential post-hardcore albums in the mid-2000s. Mclusky disbanded, but it didn't take Falkous long to reform things under this Future of the Left, name with Jack Egglestone, the band's drummer. And right now they're currently working with Julia Ruzicka and Jimmy Watkins. And even though the band's name and the band's lineup that Falkous and Jack have been working with since the mid and early aughts has changed, the focus has still remained on post hardcore music, noise rock and indie rock, with driving basslines, wild, noisy guitar phrasing and riffs, and lyrics and vocals that are pretty eccentric.

Now, Future of the Left's debut had a lot of the same rawness that Mclusky used to have. But the band's ambition brought them on to their next record, hoping to make something that was a little bit more refined, well recorded, dynamic and diverse. But the band's experimentation and ambition continued on to their next LP, but maybe to a degree where it felt like more songs on here were losing their rock edge in their aggression. Especially with more keyboards and softer tracks coming into the picture. Still, this album featured roughly the same personality that's always made the band appealing and it is worth checking out if you're new to Future of the Left. However, with this newer LP of theirs, which is actually the result of a successful crowdfunding campaign, the band brings that rock edge back in a really hard way, with some songs that are Future of the Left's heaviest tracks yet.

The very first track that kicks this entire LP off is one of those songs, with incredibly low-end driven and jagged guitar riffs that are jutting in between stints of silence, sounds like something The Melvins would have hammered out in the 90s with a very very sludgy finish, with a lot of these riffs ringing out, instead of playing in this very hard staccato fashion. And of course, even though the song feels very Melvins inspired, it does uniquely ring out as Future of the Left's with how off-kilter the riffing is and, of course, the vocals. More heavy sludge comes through on the song "Future Child Embarrassment Matrix". However, this song is not a highlight for me outside of how weirdly sexual the lyrics are, because I don't find much of the singing or the very monolithic riffing to be all that catchy or memorable. Though, it does stand out on this record and does bring to this thing some variety sonically. The sort of contrast on these heavier spots, Future of the Left does bring some very fast, nimble, catchy tracks, very well crafted, concise and clever little rock tunes, with a lot of personality. Like the track "Johnny Borrell Afterlife" whose choruses may be one of my favorites on here:

"Roy, just a boy just a boy",

with this start/stop syncopated riff on the verses and, again, very cheeky vocals and lyrics.

There are some misses on the sweeter side of this record though. Like "The Male Gaze", which feels like a Pixies tune with Falkous' vocals on top of it. And then, "The Real Meaning of Christmas", another very fun song melodically and very straightforward and accessible, but to me doesn't stand out as bold or interesting on this album, simply because of how weird every other track surrounding this song is. Aside from that, I love songs on here like "Donny of the Decks", a killer track with another catchy chorus:

"And he was good with his hands",

A very snarky verses that depict the life of this DJ character. And the song has an absurd refrain toward the back end. And then, there's the song "Things to Say to Friendly Policemen", which has this killer kazoo melody on its chorus.

There are so many songs on here that are catchy and aggressive rock tracks with loads of personality and quirk. Like the two tracks on here that are obviously very strong pieces of entertainment industry satire. Like "
Singing of the Bonesaws", which is very properly delivered piece of spoken word on top of a very grimy bass guitar riff, talking about how the music industry is tricking you into being excited and making you be afraid of missing out. And then, there's the track "How to Spot a Record Company", which has one of my favorite refrains on the back end of the track, with a bunch of somewhat bitter, angry lyrics throughout the track about disappointing labels and disappointing fans and might have been a little bit of a reflection upon some moments in the past of Mclusky or even Future of the Left.

And there are some real left hooks on here too. Like the somewhat teary-eyed and absurdly worded "French Lessons", which is a soft willed indie ballad that I like a lot. And there is the song "Something Happened" too, which is dreary as well, but also switches between moments of very sad piano and bass. And then, these joyous guitar chords playing against people cheering, it's one of these moments where Future of the Left is not only great at playing with sound play, but also mood play, with how the song transitions in a matter of seconds. And the closer is another acoustically driven track, and I do like the tone of it a lot, especially with Falkous' vocals, as lyrics seeping out between what what sounds like clenched tea. And I do love the ending on here too, with the harmonized vocals and just how together and joyous and celebratory they sound. But this song to me is an example of an issue that Future of the Left has at times that is drawing out moments for a long period of time that are not that interesting. Because I can't say I'm totally in love with the faux, back woods, dirty down country guitar playing that's on this track, it does get stale before the band even gets a chance to add extra instrumentation to the mix.

Still, despite those complaints, I do feel like this is a great record from Future the Left, one of the better rock records of this year. This album has sharp, heavy, very raw, straightforward and dry production that I like a lot, it is clear as a bell, very good playing in execution on this thing. And this record has some great lyrics and personality and vocals, which has been the most consistent element of Future of the Left's career in terms of quality. The worst thing about this record is that some of the songs on here pale in comparison to others. But there are 14 tracks on here, and none that I strongly disliked.

FAV TRACKS: SUNRISE IN BEJING, TWIN, PERSPECTIVES, WEST OF THE WEST, TANTRIC, THE LAST CHIEFTAIN
LEAST FAV TRACK: THE CORNER

DECENT 8
