Johnny Cash is one of the biggest names in classic country and rockabilly music, an American musical legend. If you're looking for an artist whose sound represents the good ol' USA, few artists hit the nail harder on the head than Mr. Cash. Even though Johnny Cash did deliver some patriotic songs over the course of his career, I mean more in the sense that Johnny Cash's tunes and his sound were heavily indebted to American roots music and gospel. Plus, American folklore played a really huge role in a lot of the stories he told through his songs too. Not only that, but he exemplified the typically conflicted American mindset so well in his personal life and his music too. Johnny and his songs were god-fearing, compassionate and loving, but there was a seedy and violent side to him in his music too — he had his struggles with drug abuse as well throughout his life. And it's not like he was the only country or folk artist to capture the American spirit or maintain an outlaw image. But what makes Johnny special to me is that he did it so well for so long, maintaining a very large audience much of the time. He did this right up to his final days of dropping records on Rick Rubin's American label. And it was great that Johnny Cash left us on such a high note. However, the record I'm talking about in this review is Johnny Cash at what is possibly his highest note. It also happens to be the most badass live album ever laid to tape.

And this LP continues to rank as Johnny Cash's best album because of its great performances, great songs, but also because it's a really revealing album too because Johnny Cash's with, his passion and his personality are on full display in the banter between the tracks, the way that he interacts with the crowd of inmates, watching his performance, one of the most hilarious moments between songs being when he's telling everyone that what's happening is being recorded for an album and that you can't say hell or shit or anything like that. And Johnny curates a great selection of songs for this live show too that shows that he really thought hard and deep about how these songs would be received by a group of people who are locked up in a horrible place for an extended period of time. He delivers tried and true hits which made him popular with inmates in the first place, like “I Got Stripes” and the iconic opening track on this thing “Folsom Prison Blues”. One of the most memorable moments in music being when Johnny Cash initially introduces himself and the crowd just goes insane. And if you're already a fan of Johnny Cash you've probably heard just the studio version of this track off of Sun Records, it was one of his biggest singles. However, hearing the live energy and hearing the inmates just cheer and howl when he says that he shot a man in Reno just to watch him die, it just adds an entirely new energy to the track and this crowd that he's playing to consistently yell and laugh and cheer at the most despicable parts of every song on this album, sometimes causing Johnny to laugh and sort of break face mid-song, even during somber moments like “The Long Black Veil”.

There are tracks on this LP that also speak to themes of travel and freedom and escapism that would most likely lend somebody who's locked in a penitentiary, some kind of relief or fantasy of a faraway place like “Orange Blossom Special”, as well as “Jackson” where June Carter is singing along with Johnny Cash. And the way that the drums are playing on “Orange Blossom Special” so tightly, so mechanically, it really feels like to me that a train is playing the rhythm section, it just adds to the travel fantasy of the track.

And there are tracks on this LP too that openly glorify drug abuse, violence and getting jailed like it's a badge of honor. Like the song “Cocaine Blues”, where essentially Johnny Cash guns his woman down for being unfaithful while he's on a coke binge. He goes to bed almost immediately, he tries to run away the next day, the cops nab him down. And even though at the end of the story he says that he's gotten in trouble and let that cocaine and let that whiskey be, the song's intended comedy and viciousness is kind of hard to ignore, especially given that the crowd is going absolutely wild by the end of the track. And tracks like this, which are some of the best on here, deliver a very frank and straightforward tale of being in jail was just a twist of dark humor, like 25 minutes to go, where lyrically Johnny Cash is literally counting down the minutes before he's hung by his neck in the gallows and he's singing about his last meal and the preachers trying to save his soul and they're testing the trap and the trap works just fine, which causes him to to laugh.

There's some very humorous and novelty tracks that sort of uplift the spirit in a way like “Dirty Old Egg-Suckin' Dog”, as well as I think the funniest track that Johnny Cash has ever done flushed from the bathroom of your heart. Which to me has some of the most clever wordplay in a country song ever.

And there are songs here too that sort of deliver hope via spirituality, like “Greystone Chapel”. And even though the crowd that Johnny is playing to seems really wild and unruly, there are some songs on this album that do manage to sort of chill the whole crowd, like “Send A Picture Of Mother”, where essentially it's one inmate talking to another who was just about to leave, get out of jail, but it's sort of apologizing about how he tried to escape and now he's never gonna get out of here because the sentence was extended, don't tell the family he's gonna be stuck in here for the rest of his life, just write back, tell him how things are going and send a picture of mother. And there's also the song “Give My Love to Rose”, where Johnny Cash is talking about just being privy to the last dying wishes of a man who's essentially leaving his family behind. And there's “The Wall” too, which does have a bit of an interruption from the crowd, but it's still one of the sadder songs on this LP — a track about a man contemplating escaping, but essentially just ends up killing himself due to the misery of being stuck in this prison.

And even though there is some similarities and melody and drum beat and guitar phrasing across these tracks. this album still feels very far from one note and maybe that's because of the variety of stories on these tracks, as well as this thing just being an emotional rollercoaster. It's not often that you hear a performer connect with a crowd so personally, much less a crowd of inmates. With these songs, Johnny Cash sympathizes with these people, he lasts with them, he cries with them, he mourns with them. It's not surprising to find that at one point in his career he really focused on prison reform activism and even testified in front of the US Senate on the topic during a parole bill hearing in the 1970s. Plus, Johnny played numerous unpaid concerts at prisons across America over the course of his career, so it's not like the idea for at Folsom Prison was just some kind of crazy out of the blue experiment. What's even funnier is that Johnny was not some kind of hardened criminal, however he's sang about the surliest stuff so off-the-cuff that everybody assumed that he had done some kind of hard time at some point in his life. In popular music today, the image of a criminal is typically reserved for something like gangsta rap, hip-hop is definitely the the home right now for the modern musical outlaw.

However, with “At Folsom Prison” and the subsequent “At San Quentin”, Johnny Cash proves himself to be an original modern music outlaw. If that's the kind of storytelling you're into then “At Folsom Prison” is probably one of the best go-to albums.

Now, as far as the production on this thing, if you're already familiar with the country twang sound of Sun Records and Columbia Records in the 1950s and 1960s, then what “At Folsom Prison” sounds like will probably not be that big of a surprise to you. I actually think another reason this album is so great because of the very raw and live performance that was coming together musically on this album that was a bit of a breath of fresh air from the increasingly commercial and pristine sounding recordings of country music throughout the 1960s and 70s. The musical performance here, especially with the guitars and with the drums, it's tight, it's fiery, there's just a lot of momentum there's a lot of energy, these songs really pulsate, they flow, they fly, they speed by. The ballads are tender, they're slow, they're moving, they're really human. Vocally, Johnny isn't as on point as he is in the studio, but his personality, his humor, his conviction more than makes up for it. The instrumentals, the vocals, as well as the inmates cheering, all these sounds throughout this record are really just bleeding into one another, sometimes drowning one another out. However, it's this kind of wildness that I love to hear in a live album. It just adds to that sense of place quality that transports the listener directly to Folsom Prison when listening to this album. In a nutshell, that is at Folsom Prison, a country record that is so great that it'll probably make you pity people that say that they don't like country music.

CLASSIC
