Not that Sufjan needs an intro, but, in case you don't know, Sufjan Stevens is a Detroit singer-songwriter whose main asset can be boiled down to one thing, ambition. Everything this guy touches just reaches for extravagance, whether it's his live shows or his songwriting, or even the instrumentation that backs it up. And this release questionably attains EP status, I said questionably because it is an entire hour. But what actually makes an EP? Is it less than 10 songs? Is it 20 minutes? Who knows. The fact is, I'm just going to let it slide because this guy has written a 2 hour Christmas album. And when you've written a 2 hour Christmas album, pretty much everything shorter than that, or less weird than that, is an EP. And possibly the best thing about this EP that isn't musical, isn't the cover (I actually don't like the cover), it's the fact that you can buy it online for 5 bucks.

This thing is based around its title track, which is a massive 11 minutes, which justifies its length with some very breathtaking horns, strings and a backing chorus. Too many times I've heard arrangements and just additional instrumentation ruin a track, take away from a song, but unquestionably the horns, just everything in this EP, complements the music so well, doesn't just do its own thing in the background, but is very reactionary to what is going on in the song, in the foreground. It's cohesive and it empowers the opening track, especially at the 2/3 mark and at the end when all the instrumentations are freaking out, getting loud, noisy and dissonant, it gives you an idea of how gigantic this thing is.

And there's a reprise of this track later, a classic rock version of it. And that thing numbers up to 8 minutes. And it's pretty indulgent to expect people to want to hear an 8 minute version of an 11 minute song. But still, they reworked this track, labored over it to the point where it hardly resembles its original version outside of the chorus. This revisit to the track has a mesmerizing Floydian groove and some trippy ass guitar soloing closing up things up.

Going into some other tracks, the Bandcamp description of this EP cites Paul Simon's track as an influence. And I'm just delighted to death to hear Simon & Garfunkel getting at least a little bit of talk. Don't know why they're not that popular with my generation. But that influence cited on the Bandcamp page is most definitely not a lie. The sound of Simon & Garfunkel in the harmonized vocals, the very skeletal, quiet delivery and also the elegantly picked acoustic guitar shows up in the 2d and the 3d track of this EP.

But things get even quieter and creepier on the next track "The Owl and the Tanager", which is very atmospheric piano ballad, which almost sounds like musical theater at some points. But I do have to nitpick here and say I don't like the reverb on that track, it seems synthetic, out of place. It is a great song, but that sound puts a bad aftertaste on it. Any problem that I had with that track, the EP most definitely redeems itself on its 17-minute closer, where the band gets even deeper into the Floydian ideas that they flirted with on the reprise of "All Delighted People". The build on this track is gargantuan, lots of psychedelic guitar soloing, lots of warm bass, drums soloing and drum fills that tease toward the next bar, leaving an ocean of space in between when the band kicks in again for another heavy riff.

I know a lot of people may get down on Sufjan Stevens for maybe not being there vocals style, maybe you're not into the indie pop thing, if you're not into the indie folk thing. But still, listening to this, listening to the arrangements on this, listening to the detail in this music, you have to at least come away from this thing appreciating something. Just a little bit of something.

FAV TRACKS: ALL DELIGHTED PEOPLE, DJOHARIAH, ENCHANTING GHOST

DECENT 8
