Blonde Redhead isn't one of the most widely known bands in rock, but they're almost twenty years of material sits at a crossroad of indie pop, psychedelic rock, shoegaze. And this new LP is a completely different story. This is "Penny Sparkle". And if you want to hear noisy guitars, dissonance and distortion, you're about 15 years too late. May I suggest Blonde Redhead's debut LP. 7 studio albums and a soundtrack after that album, Blonde Redhead is going new ways, they are going dream pop, 80s revival and a lot of the sounds on this LP are pretty popular right now in independent music. But here, Blonde Redhead does age gracefully improves, they could still change with the times. And the change is pretty surprising, even when comparing "Penny Sparkle" to its predecessor "23". The song structures here are a lot more straightforward, the sounds are sweeter, there are a lot more drum machines and the tracks all seem a little more sequenced too.

But I wouldn't say that has led to Blonde Redhead losing their taste for adventure, because this thing is not their pop album, this is not gonna get any radio play, not at least commercial radio play. What makes this thing so interesting, maybe a little adventurous for me, is how quiet it is. It is so bleak, eerie and also sensual. Which would usually underwhelm me, but the songwriting here is nothing to turn your nose up at. The chord progressions are so sinister throughout every track on this thing. You've got contrast between the chorus and the hooks, memorable lyrics, great melodies, the basics of catchy songwriting.

Considering that and the change in sound that Blonde Redhead has undergone on this LP, I think this is something fans of Beach House, Bjork and Little Dragon can appreciate. Which bring me too my most surprising comparison — when listening to this thing over and over, I found that more and more it was kinda reminding me of Fever Ray, but not as eerie or creepy, more sexy instead. And that's another thing, this album is sexy as hell, the entire thing could soundtrack a slow motion black and white lovemaking scene in a movie. Even though this is the most quiet I've ever heard Blonde Redhead for an entire album, this LP for me sucked me in. It didn't so much come out to me, but it's something that you have to give your will up to, submit to. It's not gonna rock you, it's not gonna blare sounds at you, it's gonna hug you, embrace you, pull you closer and whisper sweet nothings into your ear.

There is not a track on here that I hated, but the only thing I don't like about it is the the album art. This may not be one of Blonde Redhead's most definitive moments, but this proves that there's still a force in independent music that transcends all the buzz, all the memes and all the BS that gets a lot of attention these days. I want to say two songs underwhelmed me, and there was a track that I felt ended maybe a little abruptly, a little early.

FAV TRACKS: HERE SOMETIMES, MY PLANTS ARE DEAD, LOVE OR PRISON, WILL THERE BE STARS?, BLACK GUITAR

LIGHT 8
