Wildbirds & Peacedrums is a husband-wife musical duo, they hail from Sweden, this is their third full-length studio album, if you're not counting the compilation/sister EP record they put out back in 2010. Typically, Wildbirds & Peacedrums' records feature the fantastic singing of Mariam Wallentin and the fantastic drumming of Andreas Werliin, and that's pretty much it. The duo is able to embrace influences, hailing from jazz and art pop and maybe even a little bit of a folk music and blues too, but just with drums and vocals a lot of the time. Of course, on their sophomore record “The Snake” they did bring in some extra instrumentation to I guess kind of progress past their very minimal beginnings on their debut album. And even though it's been about eight years since the release of “The Snake”, it's not that Mariam and Andreas haven't been busy or doing other things, they of course last year together worked on Mariam's solo record Mariam the Believer, not to say that she did the album all by herself, but on that record it felt like more of a solo effort, because she was really flexing her singer/songwriter muscles. And let's also not forget Andreas' and Marian's participation in Fire! Orchestra, who came out with two albums recently, both of which they participated on. And now that they've done their thing in in Fire! Orchestra, they came out with that amazing “Blood Donation”, Marian the Believer record, they are getting back to the roots of what made them so popular in the first place, and that's Wildbirds & Peacedrums.

Now, this thing is nine tracks, it's 40 minutes, and sonically it's not quite as minimal as their early stuff. There are tracks that are simply, for the most part just vocals and drums. Like, the song “Ghosts & Pains”, the intro track of this LP, which rides heavy on a lot of vocal refrains, making it very catchy, despite its instrumental simplicity. Along with the song “Who I Was”, which is the shortest track on the entire record and maybe the most infectious too. Mariam's vocals sounding amazing on this track, so powerful, so much range, so much passion. Few singers could carry a record with just drums and Mariam is certainly one of those voices. And of course, with many of these tracks just being vocals and drums, lyrics kind of stick out like a sore thumb. And a lot of the lyrics on this record, at least from what I can observe, seem to have a lot to do with relationships, love. And not just like this initial kind of lust fueled love, more of like this long-term interconnectedness and the joy that can come from that, the complications that can come from that, this message was very perfectly displayed in the cover and single art for this record.

Now, there are tracks that feature other instrumental accompaniment, but what comes into play is very subtle. Like, with the song “The Offbeat”, which features quite a bit of vocal overdubbing, maybe a few vocal samples here and there. And some very quiet, but sporadic jumpy and somewhat glitchy synthesizers that progressively get louder as the song moves on, feels like something that could have been lifted out of an LCD Soundsystem track. The song “Keep Some Hope” seems to be aided by quite a bit of vocal overdubbing as well. And then, there's a big bassline helping out the usual drum and vocal work on the track “Gold Digger”. There's also this growing ethereal atmosphere that I think is coming through with some just reverb soaked background vocals on the back end of this track too. And just with all of this sonic color being put into the song, this track would have fit pretty comfortably on Mariam's solo LP. There are some moments where like a really primal drum beat that is fast paced and just intense or some really kooky background vocals might remind me of like Tune-Yards record, or something like that, but not as much of a pop appeal, way more raw, way more energetic. It's more of just a comparison than an influence or anything like that, because these songs also sound like Wildbirds & Peacedrums' previous stuff, it's not a comparison I just want to do to death.

For the most part the additional layers, which are very quiet a lot of the time, work really well, they work in favor of this album's appeal. The only moment that I think it works against this record is the song “Soft Wind, Soft Death”, where we have Mariam's singing, she's multi-tracked her voice so many times, to the point where her vocals are huge, they're slow, they're sweeping, they're gorgeous, I love the melody of this track. But the drumbeat, which fades in to the track, we didn't get a hard start on this song, we get this kind of weird fade, like we're happening upon the middle of this song, just feels like it's coming from a completely different world, the vocals and the drums may be working at the same tempo, but it's almost as if the pacing and the groove of the vocals isn't really complemented by the drums and vice-versa. There are also some moments, like the closing track on here that feature some really interesting, maybe slightly Kate Bush-esque spoken-word passages.

Despite being built out of such a simple instrumental foundation, this record stays somewhat varied and entertaining on nearly every track here. Wildbirds & Peacedrums just come with the same fantastic level of talent they usually do, but maybe with just a little bit more accessibility on these new tracks.

LIGHT 8
