Electronic music producer, songwriter, DJ, label head over at other people music and formerly one half of Darkseid, mr. Nicolas Jaar. He's easily one of my favorite modern artists, but this year for whatever reason, most likely because I suck, I've been doing a bad job of keeping up with his latest exploits. His latest "Nymphs" EP was okay, seem like a more abstract version of a lot of the art pop and micro house that I typically expect from Nicolas. And then, we have this soundtrack over here, which he released earlier this year, but now it's available via a free download. Didn't make the time to catch up with it up until this point, because it's a free download, it's out there on the Internet.

Again, this is a soundtrack for a film, but it's not like Nicolas Jaar was commissioned to compose a bunch of incidental music for a new movie. He took it upon himself to go back and soundtrack an older film, a 1969 avant-garde Soviet film by the name of "The Color of Pomegranates". Of course, the title of this project references the title of that film and the various titles of these songs reference the titles of the various vignettes throughout this movie. You get a bunch of small, strange, difficult to interpret scenes throughout this film. I'm not an expert on the movie, I haven't watched it a million times, I'm not going to give you a synopsis or a bunch of spoilers here. Though, you can sort of decide for yourself whether or not the music actually enhances the visuals. But I'm here to talk about the music. And being that this is a soundtrack, Nicolas isn't delivering these clear, concise, structured songs, as much as he is setting a mood. Creating motifs and moments that feel like settings and places. Which is fitting considering the project, but it makes this album soundtrack sort of difficult to enjoy like any other normal commercial record.

I'd say my number one issue with this record is the pacing of these songs. But again, the thing about these tracks is that they don't follow any logical pacing or length, or structure, as according to what would sound good on its own. They have to follow whatever amount of time they have given to them by a certain length of a scene. So, some tracks do feel a little too long, other tracks are sort of short and I wish developed a bit more. But I don't think that keeps this album from being interesting or at least enjoyable. What I would call this record is a bit of a mood album, something that I would only enjoy if I had some time to kill and I was specifically in the mood to hear this strange, experimental and ambient electronic music. This is not the music I grapple with in any physical way, at least not on most of the tracks.

There are a few cuts here that are loud and one song in particular that has a very strong backing beat, the very cacophonous and glitchy "Club Kapital". "Pomegranates" is way more like a framed painting that you've got to be very patient and be sitting there and staring at it in order to see the beauty that it has to offer. And there is quite a bit of that. There's no question in my mind that Nicolas Jaar dropped something of quality with this project. For one, the sounds on this record are heavy, they are dynamic, they're vivid. When I put this record onto my stereo, the songs here fill the room. There are some amazing sound crafting and mixing on this record, not only with the original bass sounds that you get out of these tracks, but also with the very subtle and wonderful effects Nic lays into a lot of these tracks.

Even though there are some purely and very clearly electronic elements running throughout all these tracks, pretty much every song here feels organic. The keyboards, the eerie vocals, the very strange, small, clicky, noisy percussion all over this thing that is very sharp, but also subtle too. And the noise on this project and all the completely undefinable sounds as well, this project is the definition of what I would call a sound rich record. And all the tracks here are evocative, even the quietest and most abstract of the tracks. Like the song "Past the Time", which is whisper quiet, with the exception of this one lone sound what sounds like a moaned vocal melody.

And with each song I feel like I'm transported to a different place, a different setting — marble hallways, dirt roads, rolling green hills under moonlit skies or mountaintops, and city streets too. But no matter what the setting is, there is a strong feeling of loneliness that runs throughout every single one of these songs, and sad kind of beauty that is communicated through the wonderful melodies, and also the endless atmospheres on a lot of these songs too.

Again, I do think the pacing on some of these songs can be slow or other tracks do and sort of abruptly before they even hit the two-minute mark. But again, because Nic has to follow what is going on in the film, 'cause the music here is obviously inspired by the film, so significantly that he would create this project out of the blue, completely based around it, I did enjoy it, I did love it. But I wouldn't say I liked it in the same way that I do a typical commercial release, in the same way that I've enjoyed Nic's "Space Is Only Noise", or even Darkseid's record from a little while ago.

However, I would recommend this thing and it's easy to do so, because it's a free download, it's out there on the Internet, there's not anything for you to lose by trying out this release. It's the soundtrack, I don't typically recommend or review soundtracks for the reason of pacing and the fact that it's supposed to enhance the visuals of the film.

FAV TRACKS: N/A
LEAST FAV TRACK: N/A

soundtrack/10
