Grimes is a Montreal pop singer and producer who had a meteoric rise to fame a few years ago off the back of her full-length album “Visions”. It was almost as if she had come out of nowhere really, she went from relative underground experimental pop obscurity to millions of hits on some of the biggest singles from this album, like the song “Oblivion”. As well as widespread critical acclaim for this album. However, I personally not enjoyed this album, the washed-out production and the really high-pitched nasal vocals and the incredibly rudimentary vocal melodies and keyboards just weren't really doing all that much for me, the record really felt kind of one-dimensional. And at this point, that album feels like it came out so long ago, which is odd, but I think it mostly has to do with the fact that these past three years have been so silent for Grimes, she has been putting out any EPs or anything like that. We did have “Go” single, which it seemed like there was a lot of negative reactions to unfortunately. And from what I've read in between now and “Visions” that was actually even an album's worth of material that had been thrown away. We also did have a demo version of the song “RealiTi”, which I liked a lot, I think that's a great single. We have a sort of studio version appearing on this album. Outside of that, Grimes has really kept things about this album under wraps, now I wouldn't say I went into this album excited, mostly because I didn't really dig the singles leading up to the release of this LP all that much.

We have the song “Flesh Without Blood”, which for me was just kind of this really trashy radio-friendly pop rock tune, sounded really Charli XCX inspired. And the song “Scream” was a total trainwreck, between its whistles and redundant beat and rapid-fire Taiwanese rapping from a underground rapper by the name of Aristophanes. So yeah, admittedly I did not go into this record with the highest of hopes. However, the intro really caught me off guard — the kind of orchestral electronics on this track I thought were stunningly beautiful in what I imagined or assumed are some organic instrumentation in there as well, the strings whether they're being bowed or plucked just sound really gorgeous and Grimes' very high pitched singing fits in really well with the instrumentation. The track doesn't really give us a taste of what's to come on the record, but it at least shows that Grimes' abilities sit outside of just the lo-fi bedroom pop that we're used to.

Now, despite this promising intro, I will say I think the first third of this record is a mess. The song “California”, which I like it's very peppy beat and how sunny the song is and its really persistent handclaps, but this track easily has the worst lyrics on the entire record. And the song “Belly of the Beat” is not bad, but it's kind of bland, sort of seems like a slightly cleaner version of what Grimes had already been known for doing on her last length LP, doesn't really feel like a progression of any kind, like many of the other songs on here do.

However, once past this point, the album gets instantaneously great. “Kill V. Maim” is a total banger, I like the driving rhythm guitars on this track, Grimes vocals on these verses are super sassy, a lot of personality. There are moments on the song where she's like screaming like an animal, which is actually kind of refreshing and the pre-chorus to the song sort of takes this a cheerleader chant that's really catchy and then all of a sudden once that hook busting, the yelping vocals that she does are actually fantastic, it's a really energetic fun eclectic pop song with just a booming beat and a lot of personality.

And I think the good writing and the personality continues on to the next track here, the title track, where Grimes pulls heavily from “Ray of Light” era Madonna. The instrumental is completely blissful with a persistent kick drum, just a really strong dance beat and on top of it a really snappy guitar loop. But she sort of puts her own spin on the sound with all these weird eclectic electronic edits and really breathy vocal harmonies, I love the tune a lot. The song “Easily” is an okay tune, this little piano track seems a little Enya inspired I think, not one of the better songs on the record, but sonically it is very chill, it is very serene and I guess it's a nice instrumental change of pace from what's on the rest of the album.

But following this, tracks like “Pin”, we have more pop bangers here. I mean, to me this track is like bubblegum dipped in LSD — it's psychedelic and insanely catchy. And the song “RealiTi”, I actually kind of like this newer version, I think the te older version was a little raw, it was cooler, but this newer instrumental that backs the song isn't really that bad, sort of reminds me of Crystal Castles debut record in a good way. And Grimes still has a strong song at the core of this cut, just like I already knew was there because the demo version was already great. And again, this is one of the many tracks here, where the influence of 90s dance pop just continues to ripple on this album very tastefully.

And the song “Venus Fly” with Janelle Monae, another highlight on this record for me, a really great, fun, bombastic and eclectic dance tune. I wish Monae's and as well Grimes vocals were a little louder on this track, sometimes I can't exactly tell who is who or what even exactly is being said, though I will say on this album in general the vocals are way more audible than they were on “Visions”. And despite the vocals being a little a wash and reverb sometimes, I still think these songs hold a lot of character, Grimes is turning the world of pop music on its head with a lot of these songs I think. This track specifically where it sounds kind of like a fusion of Janet Jackson's “Rhythm Nation” and some Spice Girl anthems. Plus, a few M.I.A. style refrains and some Diplo sized bass. And the songs “World Princess II” and the closing track too are a little more easygoing, bubbly, lighter and just have sunnier melodies and album definitely needed it at this point, because while a lot of these dance tracks are great, I think they're a little syrupy, a little darker and I think these two tracks are kind of friendlier more, tangible.

While, I can't say I loved this record, I liked it a lot and I think it was a really great improvement for Grimes. I mean, I think she's written better songs here, I think she's got better production here, I think she's taken more risks, she's really diversifying her sound, some of the experiments and some of the tracks here I don't think go over well, specifically in the first third here where this album's poppiest stuff and it's weirdest stuff show up. However, the rest of the material that sort of lands between that spectrum in the second half of the album or in at least the last two thirds of the album specifically, I think consistently is great. all I can say is that I hope the rest of her fanbase takes to the record as well, because I think there's definitely a brighter future in the sort of accessible, but very left-field pop music that she's producing on this record.

DECENT 7
