Oneohtrix Point Never is the most infamous musical pseudonym of electronic and experimental music producer Daniel Lopatin, at one time primarily an ambient electronic music producer, a bit of noise and drone as well, and believe it or not at one point a vaporwave pioneer — a sound that fans thought Daniel had abandoned on his Chuck Person's project “Ecchojams”, but he did indulge in it a little bit more on his last full-length album “R Plus Seven”. There were tons of experimental and ambient electronic music pieces all over this record, loaded with very glossy, MIDI melodies, some of the tracks here were a little short of breath, a little underdeveloped, I wish they kind of went longer, but I appreciated Daniel's ability to create an atmosphere, create a mood, there were some interesting motifs here. And even though I didn't love this thing, I still loved Daniel's will to experiment with something different with each new album, him sort of wowing me with his adventurous music production style, as originally will won me over on his 2011 album “Replica” — a very strange plunderphonics album — and I want to say that this album was simultaneously gentle and relaxing, while also being haunting and eerie.

I didn't really know what to expect from this new album over here honestly, because Dan's always doing something different. However, I guess I did get a hint because I saw a website — a really weird website. It was this ugly looking website that was supposed to be the homepage for a fictional band named Kaoss Edge and the reason this band was invented is because they were supposed to be an influence for Daniel on this album and there is actually Kaoss Edge music on the Internet, believe it or not, and it's just like really weird, noisy, glitchy, industrial rock music, it kind of sounds like listening to Daniel trying to make industrial rock. So, I expected that sound to manifest itself on this album at some point and it does on a few songs, add a few key points. Although, it's one of many ideas and sounds and influences that run throughout this record. One thing that I can say for sure is the music on this album is abstract, it's fractured, but it's also very pretty and well composed and melodic, and Daniel's love of samples, as well as MIDI, continues.

The strange thirty second introduction on this record glides into the very glossy and futuristic “No Good”. There's a very serene introduction on this track and then all of a sudden the song bursts into these loud distorted walls of synths chords that is topped with these really strange, glitchy robot vocals that sound like a cross between Kanye West and Daft Punk. I wish the track had a grander, more ambitious structure to it, but it was at least satisfying, it was a very cool little experimental composition. And this pattern of a strange intro track complemented with a lengthier song, repeats on the next couple of songs, “ECCOJAMC1”, where Daniel's vaporwave past is haunting him once again and we hear the echoes calling.

And then we have the song “Sticky Drama”, where again we get more manipulated twisted kind of chipmunk lead vocals. And on this track once again just like on “No Good” we have a wall of very heavy chords, a myriad of textures — some soft, some very slick, others just rough, like a saw blade. Daniel's compositions on this record are not only dense musically, but texturally as well. There is a cool little beat switch up in this track and that industrial rock influence I told you about makes itself known with some rolling kick drums on this song that are very fast, very aggressive. The first time I would probably call Daniel's music visceral. The distorted synths on this track actually start resembling guitars at some point. There are actually some moments I think toward the end of this album where some guitar sort of presents itself. And the song sort of starts and stops, and whines and unwinds, and detours without rhyme or reason, it's a pretty insane, while the structures and really ambitious, it's definitely surprising and kind of unpredictable at points, especially as the very melodic and high-pitched vocals turned to these garbled, very bassy roars. The music is just really hard to place, it just feels like it's coming from either a different time or a different world, another dimension.

Things take a very heavy turn on the song “SDFK”, which is kind of another transitional track, a very tense build-up on this song with some booming drums toward the end, which glides us into the song “Mutant Standard”, which is even more intense with these persistent rhythm patterns that are as dark as hell. I feel like I'm listening to a sci-fi thriller or something, like an alien's going to come out of the shadows and stab me. The beats eventually give way to this wall of like blinking, twanging notes combined with these washes of synthetic tones. It's like waves of chords washing over little tiny notes of broken glass. And this being the longest track on the record, there are numerous phases to this song, I mean the music melts, it becomes firmer and more defined. It eventually goes into a spot that I could only call a hyperdrive in the last third. The faded ending on the song doesn't really do too much for me, but it's one of the many spots here where Daniel's compositions feel really maximal and overwhelming. And I really like it.

And that's really just the first half, the second half continues to deliver some really great tracks. Daniel is convincing me on the second half here that he is part man, part machine, I mean the compositions feel so calculated, but yet have this very wild organic human touch to them. Evocative sounds and vivid textures and very strong emotional moods. I love the stuttering mechanical tones on the song “I Bite Through It” — this track is really prickly, there was some mind-bending shit on this track and it just gets heavier and heavier as it goes along. The song “Freaky Eyes” sounds soundtrack ready, it's got these really weird organ sounding sense in it that are really grand, really gothic, but eventually it sort of twisted through this really experimental odd abstract digital lens, sort of as if this older style of music is very quickly and aggressively being filtered into the modern age. The song eventually becomes this distorted drone that is both beautiful and frightening, which is maybe a good way to sum this album up in general — beautiful and frightening.

In conclusion, I think the record is great, I think the closing track is a little inconclusive and that's the thing about Daniel's music sometimes — he seems so focused on doing something so odd and so strange that he fails to kind of tie it all up in the end in a really kind of cohesive or thematic way. A cliffhanger, you know, that Daniel is never going to really sort of complete or extend in any kind of way, because once his next album comes out he will be on to the next thing. And not that I'm asking for that, I think this album was really great, it has a lot of the aspects that I liked about “R Plus Seven”, but a lot of the songs here are pretty satisfying and fleshed out and very progressive. And not only that but I found a lot of the compositions here to be really explosive and in-your-face and just maybe Daniel's least ambient record yet. Some spots I thought were kind of harrowing and very freaky, maybe even a little Tim Hecker inspired at some points. All I know is though I really loved a lot of these tracks individually and they do complement one another in that each track just sort of takes you in another completely unexpected and transcendent place.

STRONG 8
