This guy has numerous albums under his belt at this point and he's performed and collaborated in the past with such greats as Marcus Miller, Grace Kelly, Thom Yorke, even the Afrocentric hip-hop outfit X Clan. And I came on to this album via a recommendation from someone I was having a face-to-face conversation with, which is one of my favorite things about sharing in the musical experience, turning one another onto records that stand out to you, significant to you and move you emotionally, that's essentially the reason I started this channel. But all joking aside, sharing in the musical experience like this, telling your friends about music that you think is fantastic, that you think is stand out, that's an essential piece of music culture. It brightens lives, it changes minds and it puts certain artists on the map. And in a way on this LP, Christian Scott is doing the same, as the title tells us he is introducing to us Elena Pinderhughes, an up-and-coming flautist who actually lays down some great solos on some pretty key points on this record. As does Scott on this album with some pretty sassy post bop improvisations, as well as songs that are more low-key, explorative, set against some icy ethereal keyboards.

This record is a little all over the place, there's no real stylistic jazz boundaries that define the entire record. A lot like that Kumasi Washington album I reviewed earlier this year, Scott and his band seemed very well-versed in numerous styles of jazz and see no reason not to try a little bit of everything, from Latin jazz to very funky jazz fusion. And no matter what direction Scott and his band move in, they always pull out some very sharp, slick and musically vivid ideas. I enjoy this entire record's emotional and sonic spectrum, from the very slow and very silky and dramatic atmospheres that guys like Miles Davis used to explore so well. Like songs such as "Tantric", which is incredibly sexy, sensual, the glossy lead keyboard melodies on this thing sound fantastic, very slowly dancing trumpet solos sound gorgeous and the sputtering hi-hats that are peppered throughout a lot of the track. And then, there's hard-hitting cuts on here. Like "West of the West", which is painfully funky, not only because of its fantastic drumming, but its groove enhancing bass. There's a bit of Latin flavor on the song "Twin", which has a super spicy bassline and these two trumpets, soloing in such close harmony throughout the entire track, it's the selling point of the track obviously what the song is titled after. And it's so ear grabbing and unbelievably tight and wonderful. It's good to hear some very well performed, energetic, electrifying jazz music.

On the song "Liberation Over Gangsterism" miss Pinderhughes comes through with her flute and she steals the show, with her playing being so elegant at the beginning of the track and it eventually evolves into what sounds like tweeting, fluttering birds and bird calls. Although, I will say the instrumentation, the groove stagnates in the last third of this track. Though some of the hi-hats and propositions are cool. I will take a moment to specifically focus on the drumming here, because the percussion on this thing is amazing, especially during the very groove heavy interludes and detours on this thing, like "Runnin' 7s". And the percussion is even great on the softer tracks where the drums take a subtler approach. Like on the intro track, where we're getting these dizzying paradiddles. And it's very clear by the end of the record that at least a chunk of the percussion on this record is electronic, is synthetic. And it adds more than it takes away from the mix, it definitely gives this thing a bit of an electronic new jazz flavor sometimes. Even the closing track features these fractured piano phrases over a beat that sounds like it's coming straight out of the the hip-hop playbook.

So, this is a pretty diverse record. I wish some of these interludes, I wish some of these detours were a little more fleshed out and developed into full-length songs. Because it seems like it was least a little bit of potential here that was not totally capitalized on. And with this album being as short as it is, it's hard to see such a diverse set of songs pulled together in some kind of way, especially since some of them are short, it does contribute to the handful of tracks here feeling like a bit of a mixed bag. Still though, it is very well played, well produced, colorful, vivid and diverse jazz album, with some standout solos as well. I definitely recommend that you check it out.

FAV TRACKS: SUNRISE IN BEJING, TWIN, PERSPECTIVES, WEST OF THE WEST, TANTRIC, THE LAST CHIEFTAIN
LEAST FAV TRACK: THE CORNER

STRONG 7
