This is the new Diamond Rings' LP “Special Affections” and this guy is a Canadian singer-songwriter who just realizes the power of video. So he took a bunch of singles and paired them with some eccentric fun music vids and he basically started taking the Internet by storm. Think of it as like the Die Antwoord's story, except with a much less lackluster ending.

So what does Diamond Rings offer up on this LP? Well, some no nonsense, honest to god, no bullshit, drum machine pop. And it's funny to kind of be listening to this album outside of Diamond Rings music videos because the quality of the album, the quality of the recording really shows when you're simply just paying attention to the album — it sounds like it was recorded in a bedroom. But for something that sounds self-produced, this LP is extremely concise, very much to the point you may not find an album this year that is more “point A — point B”, to go back to the production it just kind of gets the job done. The guitars are a little tinny, all live drums sound kind of flat. The synthesizer's sounds aren't all that special, but what really hooked me about this album was the hooks. This thing really comes out swinging with the choruses — a lot of sweet melodies and just this “I'm cool, fuck you” attitude. This LP just has a lot of strengths though it's not exactly booming against the speakers, because it's all lush and heavy it doesn't have a lot of nice dance rhythms, a lot of downstroke guitar, a lot of gentle synthesizers kind of just building up in the background, even though its elements what it's comprised of it's pretty simple it's all structured extremely well. It's like building a fully functional fighter jet out of Legos.

But I think the best thing this LP has going for it is just personality and of course that all comes from Diamond Rings' frontman or founder or mastermind John O. And I love his vocal delivery on this album, it's got a lot of passion, he's extremely playful in his lyrics too, which is kind of where some of my gripes come from on this LP, more often than not you're getting these lyrical gems like retaliating with silence, running away in place, just stuff that makes my mouth go ear to ear, I'm just smiling my face off (if you can do that). But for every line like that there's a cheesy moment as well, and even though, yeah, I smile at this album, I cringe at this album, I got to kind of take the good with the bad, because I know that if this was a self-conscious album it wouldn't be half as fun.

In terms of other gripes I do enjoy a nice self-recorded album, but I can definitely tell that, you know, if this thing had better production it would sound way more banging, the type of pop that Diamond Rings is shooting for really does sound better with a high fidelity.

DECENT 8
