Experimental and post-punk music outfit Xiu Xiu, new album, wild concept behind it, totally crazy, out of their minds, do music from the Twin Peaks soundtrack, from front to back that's what this album is, that's what happens here. The Twin Peaks television series, if you didn't know, is a shining moment for director mr. David Lynch, it is one of the most legendary television series of all time. It was not only groundbreaking, but boundary blurring as well, makes any other elements of soap opera and drama, but also horror and thriller, along with quirks that could have only come from the mind of David Lynch. And the popularity of the television series has kind of researched in the Netflix era as people have been able to go back and watch, binge watch, the entire series. It's even actually brought a newfound appreciation for the second season, where popularity of the series kind of trailed off a little bit and I understand why — there are some kind of painfully weird moments and narrative directions in that second season, but it's still kind of enjoyable.

Now, Xiu Xiu, they have some great records under their belts at this point and I do enjoy a lot of their cover songs — I know they've covered Joy Division and Rihanna, and one of my favorite records in their discography is a covers album, the album “Nina”, where they do nothing but Nina Simone covers (I believe I have a copy of that sitting in my record collection, just imagine it). I really enjoyed the reinterpretations of these Nina Simone songs on this record, so obviously Xiu XIu has already proven themselves to have the ability to reinterpret another piece of music very creatively, and I do like the music of Twin Peaks so it would be interesting to kind hear that music celebrated and filtered through that very strange Xiu Xiu lens. Which in a way could be a challenge trying to make a record like that and not have it sound like just a random sporadic array of tracks, because there are so many different musical flavors. There are elements of jazz music, of ambient music, of dream pop, And how is Xiu Xiu is going to make all these sounds come together? And the answer to that question is very well — they make them come together very well.

Xiu Xiu gives nearly every single track that they cover on this record a horrificly eerie vibe. There is a frightening rendition of the song «Falling», which actually opened the show up, if you remember. And Xiu Xiu's version is complemented strangely but also beautifully with Jamie's very erratic vibrato. Xiu Xiu with this track, they really go the distance, they're not like cheating anybody out of an experience on these songs, they're performing five-six-seven minute versions of these tracks. So, they're really dedicated here because the entire album is over an hour of material. And yet, it just flows so well and every track is so engaging that it doesn't really feel like an hour, it all breezes by pretty quickly in my opinion. Even the very trudging and heavy track dedicated to Laura Palmer, her theme in the show, is so tense. Creating tension in music that sense of dread Xiu Xiu, does it so well on this track and the iconic piano chord just go over so well and they're complemented it with this kind of shocking, like a gunshot percussion. The backing instrumentation blossoms really nicely as the composition moves from that dreary passage to the chords really kind of changing flavor into something more, I guess, grand and harmonious, which is something that's always been kind of mysterious to me about this particular song in the Twin Peaks soundtrack, how this sort of goes from cold to warm and heavenly and just a few chord changes is awesome, and Xiu Xiu plays through those chord changes really well.

One of the dream pop tracks on the record, which had some very easygoing instrumentation that had melodies that were subtly sinister, the track «Into the Night» goes over really well too. Xiu Xiu wraps this track in almost just a hellish drone, there's just a very dark atmosphere to this cut. While the jazz piece «Audrey's Dance», which is really slithering and suspicious, kind of has this a nightmarish quality added to the already mysterious sound the song has. Much of the original Twin Peaks soundtrack is super mellow, and even though Xiu Xiu stays true to a lot of the musical characteristics of these songs, they make them so much more harsh and in-your-face and aggressive. The song «Blue Frank» I think, Xiu Xiu takes maybe the most liberties with, at one time it was this kind of spacey, lowdown, dirty, bluesy rock track and Xiu Xiu's interpretation of the song over here is like psychedelic noise rock, it's a total fury of wailing guitars. The bass in the backing beat and the chord progression stay pretty true to the songs roots, but just what they do on top of these foundational pieces is just pure mayhem.

The song «Sycamore Tree», which is pretty infamous for its heavy vibrato on the lead vocals from Jimmy Scott, I believe is done pretty well too, it sounds like a cut that could have made it off of Xiu Xiu's «Nina» covers album — it has very sparse, simple pianos and Jamie on top of it with his voice just going completely cool. I love what he does vocally, you know, he's a very eccentric singer, so to me it would take someone like him to come on to a track like this and appreciate how eccentric the vocals are on the original and sort of put his own spin on it, put his own personality into it.

And to close the whole thing out, we have the very disturbing «Josie's Past», which isn't so much about Josie, the character in the show, it's more a drone, kind of an abstract song piece with what sounds like some vocal snippet voiced by somebody who is supposed to be Laura Palmer or maybe we're hearing something from Laura Palmer's diary, I'm not totally sure, maybe it's something to do with the show that I'm not fully aware. But essentially, on this cut we have Laura Palmer's sort of explaining or going into detail, talking about the abuse and the sexual exploitation that she suffered at the hands of this very evil Bob character that we learn about in the show. And what is said here, added to these really tense and sour drones hanging in the background it's pretty sickening and a very stomach-churning finish to this record.

The only thing left I have to say about this record is that I'm just thoroughly impressed with how great it came out. Of course, Xiu Xiu couldn't have done this without the great source material, so we have to say thank you and give a shout out to Angelo Badalamenti for composing these fantastic songs. But the liberties that Xiu Xiu takes with these tracks, not only do they make them these songs sort of digestible in kind of that full-length album sense, but also the liberties taken are thrilling, they're exciting, they're colorful, they're intense, they're lively, they're animalistic, they're horrifying, they're freaky. And I think Xiu Xiu does a great job of reimagining this music in a way that sort of matches the intensity and the oddity of the Twin Peaks series itself.

LIGHT 9
