This is the latest full-length LP from experimental and industrial hip hop trio Death Grips, featuring Ride, Flatlander, Zach Hill, though at this point in their career as a band they've been blending so many different genres and sounds together who knows what they're playing at this point. The gang's all here, the gang's back, for a relatively straightforward release we had the teaser track “Hot Head”, we did have though a really weird video featuring the late actress Karen Black that originally teased the title of this project. We also had the 2016 “Interview” video that dropped, that was not in fact an interview, but a series of instrumentals that were released later into an EP. And the band is also fresh off of a really great tour, where they showed up to all the dates to my knowledge. We also had some Instagram clips, teasing the release of this thing of the really odd cover art on this album, which I am still kind of yet to make heads or tails of. The band released the lyrics to this album early, which a friend of mine and I read online in a video. And recently Death Grips actually put out a phone number on their Facebook account, encouraging people to head to the phone number, press one for trash and you could actually hear music from this album through the phone number, which actually reminded me of They Might Be Giants old “Dial A Song” promo campaign, like decades ago.

As you may already know, I did love Death Grips last album, which was a double LP, the fans waited quite a long time for this double album to be completed. One half of the record featuring some of the most disorienting and production in Death Grips repertoire yet, while the other half of the double album featured elements of hardcore punk blaring guitars, some of their most intense and catchy and visceral and to-the-point productions yet. And given that Death Grips has kind of given fans a left hook with every new release, they've pushed their sound, tried something different, I'm just really not sure what to expect from this new album, every time I try to expect something they completely smash my expectations, so now I'm just at the point where expectations with me for Death Grips albums have been just beaten out of me, I expect nothing.

And this time I was surprised again, because Death Grips have released an album that I think is kind of like a sequel to their 2012 album “”The Money Store”. Like that album, “Bottomless Pit” is incredibly direct, it's tight, it's very synthetic and it's very catchy, it's kind of like their second pop record and maybe this was a conscious effort and is something that is kind of reflected in the bit of cover art that shows the phrase “very shallow listening”. Because I don't think this record is going to require the re-listens and the revisits that some of their previous material, some of their post “The Money Store” material required to really kind of digest and make heads or tails of. However, I wouldn't call this simply a rehash of “The Money Store” sound or the sound of that catchier Death Grips sound. For one, there are roaring guitars occasionally on this album that were very much akin to the guitars that popped up on “Jenny Death”. And also this album just seems like a culmination of all the production tricks that the band has learned and sort of employed into their sound since the release of “The Money Store”. So now the production here is heavier, these songs are just a series of cyberpunk bangers ready to turn dance one into a fucking war zone.

Ride's vocals since the release of “The Money Store” have grown more animalistic, the group's production more detailed. I guess what I'm trying to say is that it only makes sense that if Death Grips were to go back to a sound that they would have to outdo themselves in some kind of way. they would have to improve upon the formula. And I guess in a way I think they do. I mean, this record doesn't come with the amazing initial impact that an album like “The Money Store” did, because that album was just so groundbreaking in so many ways. But the production and the recording on this record in my opinion is just phenomenal. I mean, “The Money Store” as punchy and as instantaneous as that album was, there was certainly an element of rawness due to how low fi and rough the production was occasionally. This album is just incredibly crisp, and it's a crispness that I think “Jenny Death” lacked too, even though that was definitely the band's punchiest album to date. Because there were certainly moments, especially on songs like “Centuries of Damn”, where the guitars were so loud and they were so blaring, they kind of blurred the mix a little bit and purposefully so, I think because the end result was certainly an album that felt like a mosh pit that I was never gonna live to tell about.

“Bottomless Pit” though masters that same free-flowing rage, but it also has deadly precision and just HD clarity. Death Grips have essentially perfected the art of abrasive ear candy on this album, and it's super admirable. It's not so much them challenging themselves to do something new, as much as they're challenging themselves to go back and do something a little bit better. But simultaneously, there are moments where the lyrics are kind of critiquing the existence of Death Grips or maybe this return, like on the song “Eh”, where Ride essentially states in his lyrics that he could just totally “eh”. Death Grips get tired of this and just totally be done with it. Or on the song “Trash”, where obviously the song is very much a critique of the way people kind of use the Internet to just upload tons and tons of useless garbage. But I think Death Grips kind of includes themselves in that critique too. I will get more into the lyrics of this project as we go along, but the sound of this album is incredible right from the start.

The song I keep “Giving Bad People Good Ideas”, which features this really ear grabbing female lead vocal, who I don't know who's singing, maybe the liner notes of the album when they eventually do release the vinyl version of the record to the public will tell us. But for right now, I'm just not sure. However, I do love the refrain: “I keep giving bad people good ideas, I keep giving bad people good idea”. It's totally punky and then just suddenly these roaring guitars, these pummeling drums just bust right in, total fight riff thing, sounds like something that could have come straight off of “Jenny Death”. Ride's vocals are twisted, manipulated, subtly to kind of sound really demonic and warped. I also love the skittering symbols on the track too, it's just an amazing barrage that just starts the album off in a hellfire. There's really just too much in this song going on to just bring up every single element in this review and that's true of nearly every track on this album.

Like, the enraging “Hot Head”. I love the new mix on this track, I think that bassline actually adds a lot to the song and the amazing, overwhelming shots, the intensity that the band performs with in-between these very laid-back choruses is amazing, it's like the enraging second half of “The Powers That B” brought together with the disorienting rhythms of the first half of “The Powers That B”, with a bit of a grindcore element in there. The lyrics are extremely vulgar, feature these gruesome drug use references. But also I think the track is kind of a statement on the band's musical style and kind of their mystery that they're shrouded in.

“Spikes” is the third track on the album and one of the catchiest songs Death Grips has ever written, one of my favorite Death Grips songs. I love that this band is so many projects deep right now and with each album they're still coming out with at least a few of my favorite songs of theirs. This thing in my opinion has a hook that rivals “The Fever”, which was my favorite song off of “The Money Store”. And the track lyrically is essentially about kind of losing control over yourself and Ride consistently makes reference to skidding and then sort of this hook pops in with just the repetition of “spikes spikes spikes spikes spikes”. And I'm getting the impression that the spikes might be popping tires, which he is skidding out on, maybe that's what's being said here. And the beat is just so oh, I can't even begin to describe the roaring synth on this track, just how buzzing and how abrasive they are. The way they just like grind their way through the chorus on this track, it sounds fantastic. And the bustling beat too.

We have the song “Warping”, which is a much slower paced song, features these bassy squelchy synthesizers. Occasionally Death Grips comes through with these just really noisy abrasive synth that to me sound like a little dubstep inspired, but they're used in a much weirder way. The beat is really bombastic and Ride's vocals are kind of blurred a little bit with these psychedelic reverbs and echoes. With each track the band is just kind of finding different sounds to express this consistent rage on the song “Eh”, this track is one of the calmer songs in the tracklisting here, kind of has this subdued vibe to it that's very reminiscent of a song like “Get Got” for example. And this track, I love the lyrics, probably my favorite lyrics on the entire project. Ride, his delivery on here, he just sounds so over everything he's talking about, he's so beyond caring, he's so beyond giving a fuck about anything that all these people are supposedly saying is really impressive or amazing or that these fucks that want people to be impressed with them, people that are impressed with themselves, those people it seems Ride is the least impressed with.

And there's a similarly measured delivery to the track “Trash”, as well as the song “80808”. These tracks were a great addition to the tracklisting in here, because they definitely show that Death Grips has dynamics. And I think that the instrumentation and the delivery of the the lyrics here is a little more subtle because they really wanted to bring the messages of these songs home, like on “Trash”, where again they're talking about just the Internet being uploaded with trash, we upload trash, more trash, trash begets trash, so on and so forth. It's just kind of this dizzying cycle. And then afterwards, we have “80808” where Death Grips is essentially talking about other people ripping off their sound to make their style much fresher. It was nice that Death Grips worked in songs that they didn't blow out to the extreme, like I know they could have, because it makes the catchier tracks, the harder hitting tracks stand out so much more, like “Bubbles Buried in This Jungle”, another one my favorite tracks on here. This track to me has the catchy flow of “I've Seen Footage” put together with the heavy lumbering beat of “Why a Bitch Gotta Lie”. And somehow it's slightly more overpowering, kind of like Godzilla stomping out a major city, I love the bassy kick drums and the growling synth leads, a lyrical moment that sticks out to me on this track is when Ride says “fuck if I ever let a bitch get used to me”, which definitely makes sense to me within the context of just kind of listening to the band's music, because with each new Death Grips album there's some kind of mental adjustment that needs to be made to make sense of what the band is saying and doing conceptually.

The song “Houdini”, another favorite of mine on here again. Incredibly catchy and an instrumental on here that sounds like a fusion between the factory floor and the dance floor. And what Ride is saying on this track it sounds like he's kind of poking fun at some clubber who's going to pussy church. Also, the rattling high hats on this track make this song sound almost trap-influenced. The song “BB Poison” is another very heavy lumbering beat here and a set of lyrics that references in a very meta way, the band's interactions with their audience, specifically on their Twitter account where fans react in a very desperate way to the esoteric tweets and photos that they launched on their Twitter account. Because Death Grips fans, a lot of the time and by the band themselves, they're kind of kept in the dark in terms of what their music means or when their new music is being released or when they're gonna be playing a show or something. So, as a result, I don't know there's a bit of a feeding frenzy kind of mentality that goes on when the band releases a bit of information or a weird piece of social media communique. So it was interesting to kind of see the band addressed that in a piece of music. However, this track to me is one of several moments on here, also including the song “Ring a Bell”, where even though I am into what's going on lyrically on this track, I feel like what the band is doing instrumentally isn't quite as refreshing, going back and revisiting these heavier, lumbering, very synthetic sounds, it's okay, but it's not like the the kick in the ass that I was hoping for in terms of just really brutal, aggressive production. Plus, I feel like these sounds have kind of introduced themselves to me already prior on Death Grips other records. So again, going back and kind of referencing older sounds, it's a double-edged sword, if you're not sort of progressing and you're not improving in the way that Death Grips have on much of this record consistently, then you're gonna have a few tracks that pale in comparison to others in the tracklisting.

But that's just kind of my view on this track, I've heard many other people say they love this song, for me it is a little bit of a lull, but this lull does not last long. Because directly after again we have another one my favorite Death Grips songs ever, “Three Bedrooms in a Good Neighborhood”. Which is this track that features not only one of their best instrumentals, it's so goddamn catchy, but one of their best hooks and refrains too. And the lyrics on this track really pop with all this like eye wideningly violent sexual images.

We do have the very explosive closing track “Bottomless Pit”, which is not as iconic as like “Hacker” or as “Artificial Death in the West”. But it is incredibly aggressive and tops off the anger of the album very nicely. And again, the lyrics on this thing, like “I fucked you in half” and “my cum hatch in you”. Lyrically, this is one of Death Grips just nastiest, filthiest, like most unsettling albums so far. The lyrics on here, even on the tracks that the instrumentals, a couple of which there are that I just think are ok, I'm really impressed with what's going on or at least I'm impressed with just how nasty or dismissive for example that Ride is toward this woman that he has in mind on the song “Ring a Bell”, where he goes as far as to just call her a mosquito, someone who's thirsty, someone who's kind of suck off him, and the band and tells her to try her luck in porn. But to go back to this “Bottomless Pit” track, again, violent sexuality all over this song, and in a way I think it kind of wraps up in a package the bands of BDSM like relationship that they have with their fans, which they've referenced before in their music, but maybe not in such a violent and angry way as they do on here, in a very meta way the band references themselves and their relationship with their audience. And it was kind of intriguing to see Death Grips do that in such an over way.

Overall, I really loved this record, I was super impressed with it. I mean, the production just nothing, but tightly formed, textured, interesting and just really detailed bangers one banger after another. Just scratched all those itches of like “hey, it's catchy, its aggressive, it's really detailed, it's odd and you know it's kind of taking me a little bit to figure out and kind of make heads or tails of what's happening here”. Also, the performances on here are monstrous, the lyrics on here are killer, not a lyrical moment I wasn't impressed with prior there have been songs where lyrically I'm a little underwhelmed or maybe a lyric felt a little too edgy or something. But here it felt like there were some very clear and pointed topics from one track to the next. Yeah, lyrics, production, performances, the flow of the album and the tracklisting, all the songs here complimented each other really well, there wasn't really a moment where I felt like the entire album lulled for too long. Not too many songs that I felt sounded the same as one another, maybe a few tracks that were really really akin to material that Death Grips had put out in the past. But nothing that sounded like “oh, the band's already kind of written this song three times on the record, do they really need to go back and give us another one of these tracks”. Welcome to another freaking fantastic Death Grips album, the band has fucking done it again. It's like what the fuck is going on, how do they keep putting out good freaking albums?

STRONG 9
