Brooklyn via Moscow singer-songwriter and producer Olga Bell, she is now on, what I believe, her third full-length studio album, you might also know her because she's performed in the past with indie pop titans the Dirty Projectors. And this new album of hers is on "One Little Indian Records". And listening to this thing, I have to admit I was not familiar with Olga Bell previously, but I was pleasantly surprised by this album, much like the expression on her face on the front cover. Which in itself, even before I listen to any of the music I found to be a breath of fresh air, it's rare that you actually see the artists featured on the album on the front cover looking like super happy or excited, usually they're trying to look mean or mad, or sexy, or too cool to be bothered. As far as the music on this thing, it is a synthetic smorgasbord of various shades of art pop and electronic music. It's all over the place, but the stark production and Olga's very subtle, sort of subdued and intimate vocals are enough of a common thread to link all of these songs together. But the influences on this record, at least to me, did feel pretty clear throughout the project. Think of The Knife. So, there's definitely a synth pop vibe on here, there's a techno vibe on here, there is anthemic house track featuring vocalist Sara Lucas. And given that this thing is on "One Little Indian Records", it's not surprising to find that there's a pretty healthy Bjork influence on this album too. And given how textured and fractured the beats are on this project, I'd say there's a glitch pop vibe on here too. I would recommend this to Holly Herndon fans, maybe Laurie Anderson fans. Even though the production is pretty puzzling, a lot of the time the tunes and lyrics on this thing are relatively straightforward. On numerous tracks here Olga Bell is pretty blunt about what she's singing about and blunt about her feelings too, sometimes thrown a lot of expletives in there to get her emotional message across.

Right from the beginning of the album, the song "Power User" is typically a term put onto somebody who is very proficient in using or fixing, updating computers. But instead, she uses this term to describe someone who she seems to be in some relationship with who is manipulative and controlling: a bit of a taker, if you will. And there are a handful of other tracks that actually feature catchy refrains. Like the song "Zone". Or the song "Stomach It", where over and over we hear the mantra:

"Cause now you got a taste for it, yeah
But do you have the stomach for it?"

And then, there's the song "Doppio", which I enjoy quite a bit, despite the fact that it is criminally short at 2 minutes. But on this song even Olga herself seems to be pretty pleased with how quirky and odd the tune, the layers of harmonized vocals and the beat that she conjured here came out to be. Because there are several moments on this cut where she is audibly giggling in the middle of her performance. And there's even a beat build-up at one point in the track where it sounded like for a moment first. But second, she was gonna bust a rhyme and I actually wish that ended up happening.

This record is left-field, but it's fun. And Olga is audibly having fun when performing and delivering this album. And it doesn't take itself too seriously. We have with the song "Randomness" a hard noise techno beat, and with the lyrics Olga describes the unpredictability of life, using terminology that brings up imagery of flashing lights and colors overwhelming you. The weird, awkward, bassy synths complement the very rigid beat incredibly well. The closer though, "America", is underwhelming, the handful of other tracks lack of development, there could have been more to these very odd productions, there could have been more to this album as it's just under 40 minutes or so. I would say what this album does best is leaves me wanting more, like with almost every track.

But there are a couple other issues that I have with the album. One, being that Olga's vocals are a little one-dimensional, I wish her performances were a little more lively on some of these cuts, it definitely would have changed the album up a bit. Though I do appreciate the appearance from Sara Lucas, she definitely gave the album a little bit more momentum when she popped onto the track. And most of the moments though, when Olga does reach into her upper register or digs deep and ups the volume with her performances, she gets such a Bjork vibe coming from her vocals and from her inflections that it's distracting. And I guess that brings me to my second issue that occasionally she drowns in her influences. Most notably on tracks like "ATA". Or on "Regular", which is a track that is anything, but regular. And while it does start off sounding like Bjork tune, I like how the song develops and unravels as it moves forward and loses itself and turns into this abstract electronic instrumental, I admire that about it.

It's a decent record. If you're looking for some art pop, if you're looking for some abstract electronic music, with some prominent vocals, I definitely recommend this. Any of those artists that I mentioned previously, this is going to have something for you for sure. But again, I feel like there's potentially more to Olga is doing on this record.And she didn't fully explore every song and every option that she had. But those are my only complaints generally, the album is very good, and Olga through this record has certainly become an artist who I look forward to hearing more from in the future.

FAV TRACKS: DOPPIO, POWER USER, RITUAL FT. SARA LUCAS, ZONE
LEAST FAV TRACK: ATA

STRONG 7
