Glasser had a few songs floating around the blogosphere earlier this year, one of the first of them, which was “Home”. And that track I wasn't too impressed with. I just thought it wasn't for me and I gave it a seriously premature pass, which I just shouldn't have. Well a friend of mine actually booked the band to play live in the city near me and I thought it'd be supportive, why not, just go out to the show, and my mind was blown, seriously. It was a great, show I had a fantastic time and I bought their album right on the spot, they're convinced that even though I thought that this band wasn't for me what I saw go down onstage in front of me was so good, the album couldn't possibly be bad. So, Glasser is really the solo project of Cameron Mesirow, she had an EP on True Panther Sounds last year, which included a few songs that were reworked for this album. And so what makes this so great to me is the music. The music on this LP is something you might hear if you were in the jungle and stumbled upon a tribe, a communal tribe of women, forgotten in time, but they somehow were able to write songs, using nothing electronic drums, synths and MIDI controllers. On that foundation, Cameron sings these really otherworldly lyrics and I absolutely love her voice. The vocals on this album are great. She doesn't have a thick and bassy voice, but there's a lot of force there, she sings with a lot of power, a lot of clarity and a lot of strength. And she does a lot of experimentation on this album too with her voice. There are points where she is squawking, which I really love, it doesn't hurt my ears, but it's just another really interesting sound to add to this album. There are points where she's chanting, there are points where she is harmonizing with her own vocals using multitracks, but her voice is so dynamic, she's able to sing in so many octaves that it doesn't sound like you're just hearing the same person saying over and over and over it, doesn't sound redundant, it's very fresh. Plus, as if some kind of an added bonus, there's a lot of extra instrumentation on this thing too. Strings, there's also a great saxophone on one track here.

I'd say if you're looking for something really simple, straightforward, heavy-handed with the hooks, immediate, you may want to pass on this. Even though there are moments on here that are kind of ear worms for me that I just can't get out of my head, like the freaking chorus on “Mirrorage”. But if you're looking for something really rhythmic, really hypnotic, very primal, then this should most definitely do the trick. Or I could just take the easy way out and compare this to Bjork, Fever Ray and Laurie Anderson. The whole thing lasts about 38 minutes, 9 tracks, but it feels so much longer to me than that, it's so easy for me to just get caught up in these tracks. And it's not hard to see why, the sounds on here are so lush, so thick, so heavy, the bass rumbles, the drums hit really hard and the instrumentation surrounding those things is just mixed very very well.

I think my only real complaint about the LP is that sometimes the synthesizers, the extra instrumentation sounds really really sinthetic, and that's because it is. And even though I'm okay with the instrumentation being mostly synthesized, sometimes I kind of don't like facing that harsh reality. Although it is kind of an interesting juxtaposition to hear this music that feels so primal, created by this very modern technology, maybe that's the point. Either way, it's a really minor issue. I'm loving the album from start to finish and I'm giving this thing a huge endorsement, it's growing with me on each listen.

STRONG 8
