UK pop starlet Charli XCX is back with a new project, following up last year's awesome “Vroom Vroom”, which was my favorite EP of 2016, and a project that to me is really important in Charl's discography because it marks the moment of her turning a new leaf a little bit, because almost everything she's come out with up until that point I hated to be completely honest. Yet, “Vroom Vroom” is so awesome to me, not just because it's so colorful and risky and adventurous and strange and catchy and just bizarro, but also it's just a departure from the bland, predictable electropop formula that Charli had been playing with up until that point. Now, linking up with the PC music label and bringing on AG Cook and Sophie to do some production and writing on this EP helped make that possible. And her connections to the PC music label continue on this new tape over here. Though in comparison with “Vroom Vroom”, “Number 1 Angel” is decidedly less experimental, it sounds like Cook and company are doing their best to support Charli in a poppier endeavor. “Number 1 Angel” seems more like an even compromise, although I am skeptical of Charli and PC music going in this direction, because that's pretty much what they did on the “After the Afterparty” single, which considering everyone that was involved with that track, I thought I would have loved it, but that song was an utter disappointment to me.

Now, sadly Charli and her producers moving in this direction on this mixtape, the results are a little less refreshing. But I guess there is a bit of a trade going on here, because while “Number 1 Angel” is not really that kooky or off-the-wall, the songs do feel more fleshed out, a little more mature, a little better written. There's definitely a more straightforward electropop vibe on this record with some hip hop undertones, some contemporary rap undertones here and there. But there's just enough quark to keep things interesting, keep things from sounding generic, keep things from turning completely run-of-the-mill.

The opening track “Dreamer” takes me back to the electrifying swagger of a lot of tracks on that “Vroom Vroom” EP, but now it's set against this huge, spacious, luxurious instrumental with loads of bouncy bass, which is enhanced with this tight auto-tune feature from Starrah and a great verse from Raye. Charli XCX dominates the chorus and the bridge on this thing, she almost feels like a feature on her own song because she doesn't sort of do a verse officially on this track, but it's still a good opener to the record and an interesting sort of take between Charli and her producers on sort of what is the contemporary sound of pop right now. And there are plenty of other tracks on this thing that seemed to balance Charli's pop sensibilities with PC music's eclectic style. Song “Lipgloss”, the closer on this thing “I keep it sticky-icky like lipglass”, which has the super bright, sugary, quirky hook, it's very hyper, it's very futuristic, it's very synthetic and it's very sweet-sweet on the ears, but then that is contrasted greatly by the very gritty and graphically sexual verse that CupcakKe brings to the table, which is packed with an iCarly reference. Having CupcakKe on this track is huge, I might have never really been a huge fan of a single project of hers, her music has always kind of been spotty a little bit, a little inconsistent, but she does a fantastic job on this track, she's just what the song needed to make that sweet, just a little bittersweet.

The song “Roll With Me” features all these punchy, jittery rhythms, some zany vocal samples, a bit of a PC music calling card, their chipmunk. And that just creates a lot of musical mayhem in the background, Charli XCX on top of this has this really cool composure, she's smooth, she's sexy, she's singing about this moment of lustre attraction that she seems to be having to this guy in the club, and she doesn't want that moment to end, so she's asking this guy to come with her, to leave with her, to roll with her.

The song “ILY2” is similarly boomey, synthetic, futuristic, I love the tracks blaring guitar chords or they're probably the synth pad or something like that on the pre-chorus, and then the refrain is pretty anthemic. And the track “Emotional” is probably the strongest tune that this record has to offer. This thing has a huge inspiring hook and it sounds more mature than anything that was on “Sucker”. However, I wish there was more to speak of on the instrumental side of things, PC music's wild personality doesn't really show up in the beat on this thing unfortunately, they played a really straight, they played a really plain. Again, I just wish that there was more to say about this instrumental, it just kind of goes through the motions of supporting Charli, which is fine, I guess it's cool to hear Charli putting out more music where the beat is the centerpiece, the beat is the star of the show, it's a vocal performance and her vocal melodies that are making the track so great.

Which is also kind of the case for the very low-key and intimate “White Roses”, which has this very alluring, sexy vibe to it. Then, we have the also straightforward “Babygirl”, which features this vintage throwback synth pop beat, sounds like something straight out of the 80s, Charli XCX is very sensual vocal performance here, plays toward that vibe too. I love everything about this track — from the glistening instrumental to the very sexy verses, to the bubbly hook. The one hitch on the track I would say is Uffie's feature. I mean, it's very peppy, it's just the amount of brightness that I think the track needed to pick things up a little bit, just to add a little bit of contrast, a little bit of diversity amongst the track. But she comes in with what sounds like this inflection that is ugh. Is it a fake patois? I have no idea what the hell she's doing when she enters the song, because she sounds ridiculous, it does make me cringe a little bit. Although, ultimately, I don't think it ruins the song entirely, it's so short, she's really like a blip on the radar of this song, it's like a quarter of a feature.

There are a moments though on this album where I think the material trends a little too close toward bland. “Blame It on U” is a track that isn't completely run-of-the-mill in my opinion, but the the beat is so uninspired in comparison with many of the other instrumentals on this thing, especially since it doesn't change in any significant way on the hook, the hook feels anemic, very unsupported, the song comes off kind of like a cold fish in my opinion. I feel roughly the same about the track “Drugs”. And “3AM”, while it is very bouncy upbeat tune comes off like anybody could have produced it in this obnoxious trend that everybody is going through right now, where it seems like everybody has to come through with some Caribbean tinged, dancehall tinged pop anthem.

All that being said, there were only tracks on this album that underwhelmed me, nothing I really hated or thought was awful. I think “Number 1 Angel” is one of Charli's most consistent projects yet, but if there is a persistent problem that I think couldn't continually ways her music down, it has to be the lyrics. And not that the “Vroom Vroom” EP was super deep lyrically or anything like that, but it was at least kind of left field and quirky and abstract and silly, playful. Lyrically, “Number 1 Angel” toes the line for typical pop pat. And I get that Charli makes pop music, there's nothing wrong with making pop music, I don't think the lyrics on this album are total trash or offensively bad, they're just kind of run-of-the-mill, very cliche, which is surprising to be considering that it seems like she's trying to take a very artsy approach with her songs, especially on the production end of things. And why that sense of adventure stops at the lyric some, I'm not totally sure.

Still, though while “Number 1 Angel” is less adventurous than “Vroom Vroom” in comparison, I do think this is a step in the right direction, because while I love “Vroom Vroom”, I didn't come away from that anticipating that Charli XCX forever would just be coming out with this super experimental weird abstract pop music for the rest of her career. I mean, she already has an established fanbase who probably isn't that interested in that. So again, not surprised to hear her move in a more accessible direction with this over here and hopefully “Number 1 Angel” brings her closer to coming out with an album very soon that is able to successfully balance her wishes to write these pop tunes, wright these pop anthems, but maybe with lyrics that bite a little harder, a little more memorable, and backing all of this up with a unique production that PC music continues to provide.

STRONG 7
