German ambient music and minimalist techno producer Mr. Wolfgang Voigt coming through the new album under his GAS pseudonym, his first record in 15 years under this name. And from what I've read in various comments about this record and the giveaway of a title that we have here, this is basically the dark, eerie and very long delayed sequel album to GAS year 2000 record “Pop”. And here that we're finally getting a follow-up to that album is kind of exciting for a few reasons. One, that is GAS' most widely celebrated album. And it's not often that you get a sister record coming out this many years later, I imagine that Wolfgang would have only dropped such an album if the statement that he was trying to make here was really significant, needed to be said. And I have to say, it does feel like a conscious attempt at creating the opposite album, the opposite experience to “Pop”. Wolfgang purposefully plays off of that albums crystal-clear, alluring and hypnotic loops of synths and strings and horns, it's gentle, but it has a very blissful vibe to it. There are all sorts of bright and vivid sonic colors on this record too. And for an album that pulls mostly from ambient music, it's pretty accessible, it doesn't take an experimental music masterclass to understand the appeal of a track like track four.

By comparison, “Narkopop” is way less colorful, at times bordering on colorless and texturally deficient, to the point where some tracks for me just seemed way too bare-bones. On some tracks we're getting these lazily looped or extended string samples of very faintly enhanced, with some droney synths or some quarter note kick drums, which get mind-numbing, especially on tracks like “Narkopop 7”. And “Narkopop 2”, a song where the kicks do virtually nothing to punctuate the giant blob size strings sections that float above them. “Narkopop 5” is really the only track in this vein that kind of gets a pass from me, the rhythms on this though are very bassy, they're very heavy, not quite so much techno inspired, kind of feels like I'm listening to a monster stomp on the ground in the distance or something. The rhythms are really cerebral, but they have the weight to them to kind of compete with the massive and very dense wall of strings and synths that they play against. They're not just smothered, they're not just overtaken, they don't feel like the rest of the beats on the album like they're just being tacked on. Or maybe it's more like I feel like I'm sitting down in an auditorium and I'm listening to a classical orchestra perform, but next door there is some laptop DJ and I'm listening to the kick drums of his EDM anthems thump away through the wall as all of these very syrupy string sections are kind of wailing away down in the pit orchestra in front of me. And generally, the string passages on this record go so long and they feel so undoctored that I might as well be listening to some kind of contemporary new-age classical music or something. Because again, what Wolfgang is adding on this record to these strings in terms of rhythms and synth accompaniment just feel so insignificant. There's something about it too that kind of reminds me of The Caretaker's music who is kind of well-known for at least some of his songs, merely being these texturally warped pieces of old ballroom music, smothered and reverb, the process of creating some of The Caretakers music in my opinion is a little uninspired. But at least when I'm not consciously thinking of that when I listen to The Caretaker's music, I do get some auditory pleasure out of it. “Narkopop” on the other hand feels equally basic, but with no gratification factor. And I think it might have something to do with Wolfgang consciously trying to create the opposite, the polar opposite musical experience to “Pop” on this record, because I think there's so many fundamentally good things about “Pop” that to work against these ideas, would be to work against the potential to come out with a good record. A simply darker approach to sound and texture and melody, while still employing a lot of the same techniques on top of pacing, editing and sampling, would have sufficed. But Wolfgang was obviously looking for a much deeper change of pace, to the point where the sister album here lacks variety, lacks engaging ideas, lacks compelling musical passages and those are just a few of many things that this album has that are essentially just a negative opposite to the ideas and sounds on “Pop”.

There are a few bright spots on this album so to speak. I like the dreamy bright walls of strings on the song “Narkopop 3”. The plucky disjointed melodies on “Narkopop 6” I thought were pretty interesting. The moments I liked on an album most were the ones that really weren't rhythmic at all and I just kind of got these really weird washes and walls of tone that were sometimes dark, sometimes beautiful. Maybe since there wasn't really a strong rhythmic component Wolfgang was focusing more I'm just trying to make sure that the tones and the chords and whatever kind of compositional elements were going into these tracks were a bit more engaging. The beats and string passages on “Narkopop 10” sync pretty tightly, to the point where the songs almost like a little visceral. But do they justify the tracks 17 minute runtime? Not really. Because if I haven't said yet, this album is 70 minutes long or so. Call me an uncultured pleb with no taste whatsoever.

LIGHT 2
