Singer-songwriter Leslie Feist, she's back with her first album in six years, following up the album "Metals". And believe it or not, it's now been 10 years since her big indie pop breakout sensation "The Reminder". Feist' last album "Metals" I was pretty lukewarm on that project, didn't care for it, clearly she was trying to make a break away from being pigeon-holed into the indie pop corner people were throwing her into in the 2000s. Personally, I thought the transition she had made to a raw or skeletal sound was a little awkward. But with "Pleasure" over here she seems to be continuing down that road. However, this time around the results are so much more gratifying. This record over here, it's beautiful, it's raw, it's loose, it's in the moment, it's enjoyably spontaneous. Leslie's music hasn't sounded this rough around the edges since "Monarch". But that record is her first full-length record. The difference between now and then is that there's so much more confidence in Feist music, there's so much more swagger on this album. She's going back to a rougher sound with a purpose now, it's not because that's sort of the position she was in at the time. And I'm not trying to say that this is a lo-fi album, it's so dirty and badly recorded that it's unlistenable or anything like that. It's a very dynamic record, there's something very natural and organic about the sound of this album. There's a lot of ambient sound around the drums and the vocals.

There are a lot of very natural smudges and mix and scars to the sound of this record, all of it adds to how intimate and personal feels. I like the vibe of this album — the distant drums, the messy, blemished guitars, the layers of background vocals and Leslie's gorgeous voice. Which is sometimes manic, sometimes very reserved, quiet and somber, sometimes very passionate, tons of conviction. And the performances on this record, instrumentally, lots of chemistry on this thing. It feels like Leslie is letting go of any and all artistic intuitions on this album too.

"Baby Be Simple" is incredibly straightforward and vulnerable and raw acoustic guitar ballad, there's nothing gussied-up about it. But then, in the second half we get some nice organ chords and background vocals to warm it up and bring it some body. The song "Century" also features a very strange spoken word passage from Jarvis Cocker at the very end, which I absolutely love, his voice is amazing, he brings so much drama to the track, I love the way that his words play against the refrain that play through at the end of the cut. And on the track "A Man Is Not His Song" there is a very strange and unexpected Mastodon sample that booms its way into the very finish of the track.

There's some enjoyably weird ideas on this album that bring the record a lot of character. But ultimately, it's the quality of the songs that sell this thing. "Pleasure" is the title track of this record that kicks the entire album off. And even though it does have a slowburner start, for me the song gets a strong whiff of urgency as soon as the driving root note guitar leads start popping up in the track and giving the song a propulsive rhythm. Leslie's anxious vibrato at this point in the song also gives the track a lot of tension, even though there's not a whole lot going on. I love the way her voice goes dark right before the chorus build up in the way that her guitars blasts in suddenly with loud, crunchy, roaring sound. The track smooths out beautifully right after, moves through different musical phases, seems to incorporate what sounds like either some woodwinds or strings to give it a bit of a more panoramic presentation. Not entirely sure what that sound is, but it sounds great. And all the rock-and-roll finish of the track at the very end has a very Velvet Underground vibe to it.

There's also something very skeletal and raw about this record that reminds me of some of the more minimalist records in Scout Niblett's catalog. I also think in a lot of ways this album is the kindred spirit to PJ Harvey's "Let England Shake". I love the chilling refrain and growing emotional intensity of the song "Lost Dreams". The gradual momentum of the track is great, the droning climax of the track is awesome as well, very dissonant and very bright. And I love how immediately after the song smoothes out, it's very dreamy, hypnotic outro. The song "Any Party" is a big contrast from that, because it's not so much smooth as much as it is clumsy, almost purposefully, so with these guitar chords that are stumbling drunk all over the track. Also, these twangy, noisy guitar leads weaved into these chords to give them a little bit more swagger. I love how wild and ungroomed the song is. I also enjoy the track's lyrics of devotion, where Feist is singing about how she'd leave any party for this particular person who she has in mind, even if it's a good party. There's a satisfyingly epic finish to the song too that's fantastic.

And "A Man Is Not His Song" is not only one of the most thoughtful songs on this record, maybe the most thoughtful song on this record, one of the most thoughtful songs have heard in a while. I mean, not only is it a bit of a reflection on masculinity and femininity, but it's a strong statement on separating the artist from his art, that the person who wrote a particular song or created a particular thing is not necessarily that thing. Feist goes on to comment beyond that, saying that she is not a story, as if she had been sort of the the subject or the person featured in maybe a story or a tale that was a featured in a song that maybe another man who she knew wrote. I love the patient beats that pulsate away gently in the back of the wind, something that could have derailed the dynamics of this track big time or made it feel redundant and stale. But instead, the song is kept fresh with some emotional vocal performances and some subtle embellishments throughout the track with some keyboard, some vocal harmonies, some horns, also Feist's filthy guitars on this track are impressive too. I love the variety of textures that consistently pop up in each track, it's always a different sound palette, while staying true to that raw, intimate feel. Then, there's the very bluesy "I'm Not Running Away", which is an emotional stutter, it's another great addition to the tracklisting, there's not a whole lot about the song that needs explaining. Everything great about it, is so there on the surface — solid chord progression, wailing guitar leads, the sassy shots of group vocals, how dynamic the vocal performance on this track is.

I only had a few complaints walking away from this record. Some of the topics and lyrical subjects could have been maybe a tad more original. "A Man Is Not His Song" as such an interesting idea for a track, I would love to see Feist in the future explore more alternative song themes. I wish that "I Wish I Didn't Miss You" had more instrumental layers. To speak of the weird sort of vocal effects thrown on Leslie's voice, for me it's not enough to fill up the track and give it body, give it something interesting, as far as a sonic angle. I like something on this track to give the hook a little bit, more weight. And I'm getting out high and getting low — the verses on this track are so tense, they're so spacious, they're so open, I wish they were a little bit more busy, a little bit more active. And the verse, while it is definitely a bit of a visceral cathartic release, a little bit of bass pops in, a little bit of rhythm pops, I still wish that drop, that progression, that moment of eargasm could have been a little bit stronger, more intense. The song is a little more shy and dodgy than I would like it to be. And the closer I wish had a bigger presentation to it. Especially since when you read into the lyrics of the song, the track seems so confessional, it seems such a strong affirming monologue type moment. And I would say even the epic organ chords on the track lend themselves to that emotion, lend themselves to that tone to. But the song displayed so quietly, it's played so subtly, it's played so plainly, this feels like a moment that should have been a sonically, a musically bigger spot on the album, because emotionally and thematically it's huge. It's so confessional, it's spiced, ripped in the closet open and throwing all those skeletons out. I wish it wasn't approached in such a light, dainty way.

Still, 2017 continues to rack up the quality singer-songwriter records, this is another good one, another great one and one of the best things Feist been in a long time. Definitely worth checking out, even if you consider yourself to be a hardcore fan of her poppier stuff, this is well worth listening to. Don't miss out on this record, don't discount this record because of an experience you had with the past Feist album or an assumption you made about what Feist is or what music she makes or whether or not she appeals to you.

FAV TRACKS: PLEASURE, LOST DREAMS, ANY PARTY, A MAN IS NOT HIS SONG, THE WIND, CENTURY, I'M NOT RUNNING AWAY
LEAST FAV TRACK: I WISH I DIDN'T MISS YOU

DECENT 8
