This is the latest record from California crooner Lana Del Rey, who for the first time on an album of hers is is shown is depicted beaming, smiling, scaring the viewer directly in the eyes, not just like looking really blankly in the distance while. Lana Del Rey really needs no introduction at this point on her fifth album. It has been a very weird and a very rocky road to get where she's at today. Her sudden thrust into the spotlight with singles like “Video Games”, her botched SNL debut, her artistic evolution from her breakout album “Born to Die” to 2015's “Honeymoon”, which I found to be surprisingly impressive at points. Lana finally embracing the vintage pop and rock sounds that have always inspired her, with an instrumental backdrop that was a little more truer to the time period. And then I was kind of surprised to hear Lana lyrically take a bit more of a dominant role on the narratives of some of these tracks, rather than just being some kind of submissive damsel to whatever bad boy crosses her path. “Honeymoon” was not a perfect album, far from a perfect album, but it smelled like progress to me and had me kind of excited to hear whatever Lana was going to do next.

But it was hard to kind of maintain that excitement, given some of the teaser tracks for this new record over here. the song “Coachella - Woodstock in My Mind”, which I thought was going to be some kind of throwaway, non-album track, just because of how terrible it was. No, this song is on the album and it's hilarious even before the song starts just because of the title. And the song got even funnier once I actually heard the lyrics to this thing, which essentially reveals a really weak attempt at trying to make a somewhat political statement. The sentiment of the song essentially boils down to her worrying about all the kids at Coachella, because the world is just so crazy right now. All these kids that have been money to throw away on a really expensive music festival, I'm really worried about them, I'm worried about their childrens. It's a really shallow statement, a really hollow sentiment. I mean, there are thousands and thousands of people who are on the verge of losing their healthcare, 90% of the casualties of our drone strikes are innocent people. As our own government has documented, we're in the middle of a really disgusting drug war, like it just seems like a lack of priorities, like “oh no, things are getting so bad, we have to worry about people who don't really have that much to worry about”. Not to mention the trap style percussion on this track and really murky synthesizers didn't really seem to complement Lana's musical and singing style all that much. I mean, I know this sound is really in vogue right now, but that doesn't necessarily mean it does Lana any justice.

So, of course, it was unfortunate to also hear these really prominent and synthetic and very sequence somewhat rickety beats on other tracks here. Like, on the single “Groupie Love”, and I do like the very swaying whimsical gauzy chorus of this cut, but the back to back A$AP Rocky feature's placed here and on the song before it are kind of unnecessary. Which is why I'm curious as to why the song “Summer Bummer” just was not cut, like it's not that great of a song, Lana sounds like a feature on her own track once the rap verses get started. The track features these horrendous Travis Scott inspired little auto-tune embellishments in the background that are ugly. And again, it just seems like the further Lana goes down the trap road, the more awkward and the more out of place this music and this record sounds.

I'm even more confused considering that the record has 16 tracks at 72 minutes long, which is just a smidge longer than “Honeymoon”, but Jesus. There are at least a couple of tracks here that could have hit the cutting room floor and it would have made the album better. Like, on the anemic “White Mustang”, which ends abruptly, has a kind of weak structure and features this ridiculous whistling that does not sound all that great in the track, sticks out like a sore thumb. And lyrics that even for Lana's standards are kind of silly. But I'm kind of getting ahead of myself here, because despite the fact that there were some misleading and some unlikable singles going into this record, for the most part Lana kind of sticks to her guts here and builds on the lavish and the somewhat vintage instrumentation that made up the bulk of her last album. Especially toward the end of the album, like on “Heroin” and “Change” and “Beautiful People Beautiful Problems”. And in “Get Free”, track where Lana seems to embrace the sound of 60s girl groups, which have always inspired her but she's never kind of really hugged it tight and sort of executed it as peppier ways she does here. And honestly, it's one of my favorite tracks she's ever laid down onto a record.

And actually, the starter track “Love” on this thing, while it did kind of underwhelmed me when I initially heard the single, in the context of the record I do like it quite a bit. It's a pretty solid song and it just seems like Lana's standing on an even grander platform of instrumentation this time around. What just ends up making this album feel kind of awkward is hearing Lana try to reconcile the musical and cultural worlds that collide on this thing. You're talking about an album that features both Playboi Carti and Stevie Nicks. And boasts production credits from both Sean Lennon and Metro Boomin.

Never have Lana's new school and old school influences sounded more at odds on a single album, which is odd because I felt like they came together so harmoniously on “Born to Die”, even though a lot of the songs on that record in my opinion worked awful, I did give that album credit for kind of melding this grand orchestral instrumentation with these subtle notes of hip hop production. Now, on “Lust for Life” they're not really gelling all that well. Case in point, the song “Cherry”, which features these really weird drum machine fills that just kind of click and twitter away against Lana's moaning vocals on the chorus, they're kind of interrupting and just sound out of place, ridiculous. Which is a shame, because I feel like this is one of the decent tunes that the album has to offer. “Lust for Life” just continually delivers these really weird production choices, many of which feel like they're just added into the album to give it more of a contemporary flair. Like, oh, here it sounds really old, but wait, here's something that sounds kind of new. Most of the time on this album I just wish Lana would embrace her old soul tendencies and just simply stick to that. I mean, the opening lyrics of this record already acknowledged the fact that Lana is locked into kind of this new world, old world time warp. Why try to fix what's not broken?

There are some moments on this thing where I think the present is more effectively worked into the past. I mean, the more I listen to it, the more that the duet Lana does with The Weeknd on this project grew on me. With all the glimmering background instrumentation, it's kind of fireworks. Abel's voice did sound a little out of place with this backing instrumentation, but I do think that once he and Lana came together, it worked, I dug the collab, even if there are times when I think the lyrics could have been better or I was a little turned off, because Lana had to put on her phone sex operator voice. And I just don't get why once Abel starts singing on the track, you can hear these like ever so subtle and super faint twittering trap style high hats in the background, they're there and I don't know why, they're so quiet, they don't even need to be there. But it's like we just need to add them there, because that's contemporary, it's new.

There's some other risks Lana takes on this record, like it seems like she's making a greater effort to color the background of these tracks with a little vocal improvisation here and there. Where she's just reaching into her upper register and pulling off these vocal riffs where she's put a little stank on it. Or on the song “In My Feelings”, where she kind of sounds like at one point like a squeaky breathy Kate Bush singing while being violently shaken after taking too many caffeine pills. But you know, a good chunk of this album is the usual Lana that we have come to know and love or not love depending on your opinion. But I will say slightly improved, but for the most part the same strengths and weaknesses, the sort of flat emotional delivery using moodiness as a crutch, the limited lyrical scope. I mean, lyrics that I have to kind of suspend all standards for or else I'm just going to have my eyes rolling back. But, I don't, there're just “Beautiful People Beautiful Problems”. Please, stop.

The only thing that makes that very bitter pill worth swallowing is the Stevie Nicks performance on that track, which is actually really good. I like the inclusion of this feature a lot, because it actually says a lot about Lana's singing. Because Stevie seemed to be such a huge influence on her. Though I guess the downside of this is when they try to harmonize on the chorus, I feel like I'm listening to Stevie Nicks and Stevie Nicks impersonator on the same cut. Still though, I do like the introduction of the track, I do like Lana and Stevie singing separately on this song and I do think it's one of the better tunes on the project.

And I know I'm being really negative on this album, but for the most part it's because I think they were really obvious improvements that could have been made to this record, and this album had more potential than was actually capitalized on. And that's not to say that there aren't great tracks, that's not to say that there aren't highlights, it's just that the album is kind of front-loaded and very back loaded. I think “God Bless America - And All the Beautiful Women in It” is one of the better tracks this album has to offer, the kind of easygoing breakbeat in the background kind of reminds me of like a trip-hop song from the 90s, while the gauzy instrumentation and Lana's vocals on top sounds like something out of a dream pop tune, comes together very nicely. And the lyrics, I like too, which are partly patriotic, but also kind of a female empowerment anthem too. The track is very lavish, there's something almost watery and murky about it too, like I'm being submerged into the instrumentation on this thing.

And oddly enough, the song “When the World Was at War We Kept Dancing” is kind of a political statement and one that I don't actually mind in the tracklist here. It's far less silly than the “Coachella” track and it's actually kind of a bit of a meta-analysis of the bliss and ignorance that some of Lana's fans might have found themselves in once they woke up and found themselves in Trump's America after election day. And once again on this track too we get very enveloping, very intoxicating, very mystical instrumentation. The Sean Lennon cut on this album is really gratifying, as well as kind of steeped in a very subtle Beatles aura, especially with the chord progression at points reminding me of the song “Something” from Abbey Road. Song “Heroin” reaches a surprisingly emotional climax in the second half. And on the song “Change” we get a very somber and a very hush, but a really interesting piano ballad, which is a little more intimate than I would have typically expected Lana to go on an album.

There are a lot of great moments on this record, it's just that I feel like Lana needed to pair this album down to its truest highlights and cut out all of the production gimmicks that feel like they were just added in there to make the record feel more current. Because honestly there's already enough of Lana in the present to make the music have this kind of natural anachronism to it already. There's really no need to force it with hideous production and unnecessary features. When I look at the entire album, I look at the entire tracklist, despite my lack of enthusiasm for a good chunk of tracks in the first half, I do actually like more songs than I dislike on this project. Like, for the first time ever, on a Lana album ever. And I have to kind of admit that Lana slightly outdid herself once again on an album. And maybe this trend will hopefully continue into the future.

LIGHT 6
