Kero Kero Bonito is a pop trio hailing from UK whose record that I reviewed not too long ago, Bonito Generation, one of my favorite albums of that year, is actually one of the most bubbly colorful fun and personality driven pop albums to drop this decade, smashing together elements of dance music and hip hop, as well as Japanese pop and synthpop — it's not going to be for everyone, some people are naturally going to find Kero Kero Bonito just a little too cutesy and funny, and weird, and child like. They have a new EP out, which I was very excited for, after they dropped one of the teaser tracks to this thing, Only Acting, which was kind of a change of pace for them, because it was a guitar driven track, not so many beats and synth lace throughout the cut. There were actually a few musical passages on this track that read to me as being like pop punk-esque. And overall, it was a style and a vibe, it was a flavor of the band pulled off pretty well, despite it not playing to their typically cute and eclectic strenghts.

So that did have me pretty excited to listen this new EP. However, it is kind of a letdown in my opinion — it's just 4 tracks, it's just 11 minutes, so pretty scant songs on this thing, not really all that fleshed out. And the rest of the EP is guitar driven as well, which is not necessarily a bad thing. However, I don't really think this sound plays to Kero Kero Bonito strengths, nor do I think they really kind of built these songs out all that well, because for the most part what the band delivers here is just a very bland, watered-down, indie-pop sound. Some of the tracks on here actually sort of sound like what could be demos for songs that they might build upon down the road, build up into their impossibly cute sound they're known for on their breakout album. While some of the melodies and the vocals on this EP are ok, it just doesn't really have that much bite, it doesn't really have that much color, it doesn't really have that much energy either. The EP just feels very dry and kind of falls out on its facade. Outside of the track Only Acting, I'm really kind of indifferent toward this thing, I don't really care for it that much, and there's a very little on this EP in my opinion that is going to keep me coming back to it throughout the year.

So, while I'm glad the band took a risk, tried something different, or maybe showed a raw and more stripped backside of themselves to their audience. This is just not really all that interesting of a release to me and I personally can't wait to hear the trio get to some more cutting edge sounds.
