Death Grips are a Sacramento based experimental hip-hop trio, consisting of drummer Zach Hill, producer Flatlander, also frontman, lyricist, extraordinaire MC Ride. As a trio, they exploded onto the Internet based music scene much earlier this decade through releases like their Exmilitary Mixtape and The Money Store. Ever since their musical breakthrough, their sound has remained one of the most polarizing things in modern music today. And for good reason, the group's clash of hip-hop, industrial music, noise, glitch pop and electronic music is not the fusion for everyone. And I think Death Grips' sound has only managed to get more and more difficult as the years have drawn on. Like on the animalistic and unruly No Love Deep Web, or the incredibly abstract Government Plates, or the 1-2 punch of the double album, The Powers That B, the first half of which features all these really super prominent Björk vocal samples littered all over the record and then followig that up with Jenny Death, which is a roaring guitar riff heavy record. Bottomless Pit pretty much played as a somewhat catchy update on a lot of the sounds the band has forged up until that point — nothing all that exciting and new, but still an incredibly well produced and catchy album. But immediately after this release, Death Grips went left-field once again with their Steroids Megamix: incorporating elements of cyperpunk in their already eclectic and chaotic repertoire, not to mention that this megamix or EP is just this continous 22 minute long musical experience.

Now, as far as my expectations for Year of the Snitch went, I kind of hoped that Death Grips would continue down this experimental road, continue to try new things. Especially since it seemed like they were kind of painting themselves into an artistic corner with Bottomless Pit as good as it was, because to me that album and Jenny Death kind of feels like the closing of a chapter in the band's career, and I was sort of hoping that steroids was a bit of a prelude to what they might be doing going forward. However, I was kind of lukewarm on some of the teaser tracks to this album going into it. So I didn't really know what to expect out of this album, which is partially worrying, but simultaneously exciting. I like the fact that I've been listening to Death Grips for almost a decade now, and I can pretty much expect for them to surprise me with every new release. It's great that a band almost 10 years on is still pretty much pushing the envelope. And they pretty much do that on Year of the Snitch while departing pretty boldly away from the industrial hip-hop sound that they're known for. Now, it's not completely gone, I mean, I think the core elements of the band sounds still very much remain on this album, but Death Grips are incorporating way more elements of psycheledic rock and krautrock, electronic music, experimental and progressive rock, even a little bit of jazz too. On top of that, it feels like Death Grips are starting to incorporate some of the out-there compositional ideas that you might find if you went back and listened to some of Zach Hill's solo stuff, on albums like Astrological Straits, which felt like they were having more presence in the band's sound on that Steroid megamix too.

So again, while Year of the Snitch does feel like a stylistic and a genre change for the band, you're still getting Zach Hill's insane drumming, Flatlander's abrasive, futuristic and dark production, Ride's intense and absolutely insane vocal performances and his cryptic lyricism. But now, all of these elements are being fed into very different musical styles in with incredibly kooky instrumentation — weird synthesizers and effects, and delays, and samples, turntable scratching, quite a bit of that. There are also multiple instances on this album, in which Death Grips are sampling their older material too.

Generally, I would say the songs aren't quite as dark and edgy as a lot of Death Grips past material, like on records such as No Love Deep Web. Instead, in the 37 minutes that this record lasts, Year of the Snitch comes off way more absurdist and abstract, and completely weird. Also, there are lots of seemingly random transitional moments from one track to the next or short interstitial tracks that actually add quite a bit of flow and personality to the record.

Honestly, the whole thing is a really wild Ride right from the start. Kicking things off, with Death Grips is Online, which is what a 90's rave must have sounded like if you were on enough drugs to kill a horse — with all these trancing delayed synth leads, very persistent bustling driving beat in these enveloping washy synth chords that kind of feel like when they pop in I'm whizzing down a concrete tunnel at a 1000 miles an hour. Also, Ride's shrieks throughout the track, the booming bass, the turntable scratches — all add a lot of very quirky and freaky flavor to the mix. The track is trippy, it's overwhelming, it's infinitely groovy.

The track Flies has grown on me quite a bit since the release of the album. Originally, I found it kind of underwhelming, but in the context of the record, it feels like a perfect counterpoint to Death Grips is Online. Also, the kind of sour and warped synths are make much more sense in the context of the electronic dance music influences that much of this album is immersed in. Also, the super disturbing lyrics on this cut about flies, vomiting obviously to digest their food:

“Should the opportunity arise, vomit me flies
Flies vomit me, together's unwise, sever all ties
Should the opportunity arise, vomit me flies
Flies vomit me, vomit green eyes”.

The lyrics on the hook, I think, are a little open to refrain, but they way that I'm reading them, it's like flies are vomiting up, Ride as if he is the disgusting enzymes that come out of them. Is he filth, is this song filth, is he dead? I don't know. Either way on this track, I feel like the band is really kind of embodying the dark underbelly of the Internet, and also kind of enhancing the narrative of tracks like Trash from Bottomless Pit for example. As well as Shitshow later on the album. There is a very eerie and droning transition out of flies that brings us into Black Paint, which is quickly becoming one of my favorite Death Grips songs period — it's a jammy twisted piece of experimental arena rock. At points it kind of reminds me of some of the more guitar centric tracks on Jenny Death, but even better this time around, I loved the lyrics about darkness being shrouded in it. It almost feels like an update on The Rolling Stones' Paint it Black, but for the millenial industrial hip-hop generation. The song features these amazing dense heavy tension building verses that eventually explode into these like riotous riffs that feature on top of them and Ride's chanting — it sounds like something out of an AC/DC song. There's an awesome instrumental bridge on the cut, a kind of jammy, trippy, freaky synth solo at the very end.

The song Linda's in Custody is very quiet and unsettling cool down point. With these quirky synth leads on the hook, a super-busy and synthetic beat that kind of reminds me of past Death Grips releases like No Love Deep Web or Government Plates, and Ride's rapping in a very quiet fashion with his vocals kind of overpowering the beat in any way right up in your face, super claustrophobic. People on the Internet have been talking about the Linda being mentioned in this song, in fact being Linda Kasabian, further cementing the series of nods throughout the Death Grips discography to Charles Manson and The Manson Family. And while this cut is not one of the harder or more aggressive in the tracklist here, it does still have lots of detail to offer, plenty of strange effects whizzing by, and really impressive musicianship and production techniques all around. We get kind of a fun transitional moment with horns section which features these keyboard passages and drums that just do not let up — they're so mind-blowingly intense for the minute and change at this track lasts.

We get a breather post that with the song Hahaha — another supremely weird teaser track that now makes a lot more sense in the context of the album. And despite the psychedelic and kind of silly additions to Death Grips sound on this cut, believe it or not, this is actually one of the more familiar sounding moment on the record. Meaning, this feels more in Death Grips industrial hip-hop wheelhouse, that in the song Streaky too, whose absurd keyboards and vocal effects stand out so much more in the context of Snitch. Also, I think I can unequivocally say that these two tracks are maybe two of Death Grips most fun songs. Meanwhile, the utterly chaotic Shitshow kind of serves like a modus operndi for the record — it's kind of like the band's trying to sound as noisy and abrasive, and chaotic as possible in a very short span of time, and definitely succeeding the process. Again, to me this cut is very much like the trash of the album.

The song Dilemma is a super jammy linear and krautrocky in peace. A song that generally sees Death Grips sounding more like a live and a full band, as opposed to a group of people just kind of assembling a piece of music in a very sanitary fashion, in a digital audio workstation. Between the grooves, Ride's performance, also the interesting synth leads on here, the riffs — it's all very thrilling and futuristic sounding. The Fear also sounds very much like just a live band performing, but now, instead of a kind of linear krautrock thing, it almost feels like a fusion of jazz rock and progressive rock. With these super sinister keyboards, never thought I would ever hear Death Grips put tgether something that sounds like this. On the lyrics, it seemed to call out to mental instability, phobias.

This is the first time in a while, like since No Love Deep Web the band's music sounded genuinely frightening. Death Grips is online.

LIGHT 9
