This is the latest full-length album from rapper, singer, songwriter, producer Malcolm James McCormick, aka Mac Miller. Mac Miller has had a pretty long and interesting evolution, going from young fratty pop rapper to left-field stoner rapping over Flying Lotus beats. These days though the guy seems to be kind of trapped in a moody emotional rut, where Mac's understated bars meet underwhelming instrumentals, with some very mony singing and vocal lines that sound like Mac is simultaneously trying to hold a tune and a mouthful of water. Of course, I'm talking about Mac's last full-length LP “The Divine Feminine”, a record that I found so traumatically boring that it feels like it came out six years ago to me, even though it just dropped in 2016. I don't know, as far as this new album goes, I went into it just crossing my fingers hoping for some kind of change. But no, “Swimming” is yet another attempt by Miller to speed ahead in the syrupy alternative R&B lane. But the end results are about as fun as rush-hour traffic. The beats on this thing are consistently lifeless, spacey and bland, which kind of hurts to say, because looking at the production credits of this record there are actually a lot of producers here that I like.

Generally, the beats on this thing are pretty pleasant, occasionally they are show-stoppingly pretty like in the case of “2009”, but they're mostly wallpaper. From the wavy trap beat on “Self Care” to the revving farty synthesizers on the closing track “So It Goes”. Occasionally, a rhythm might pick up on this thing with a good beat and a great bassline. Most notably on the track “What's the Use?”. But I have never heard an artist who so effortlessly turns a funk rhythm section into something that sounds like you should be napping to it.

Of course Mac Miller's singing on this record is still moany, weezy, flat and awful. He still doesn't seem to have much in the way of any vocal presence, as his pitch tone and volume are still really weak. And there aren't really any weird or eccentric qualities to his voice either to make it appealing in unconventional way. Moments where Mac's singing is in the spotlight, like on the start of “Perfecto” or on the end of “Self Care”. In my opinion border on parity and sounds excruciating. Meanwhile, every warbly, squeaky vocal line throughout “2009”, despite the track's gorgeous intro just feels like I'm locked in a torture chamber, I'm wanting to scramble for anything that will drown out the sound — the car horn, a chainsaw, a crying baby, because on this track Mac only sounds like two or three shades less comatose than Lil Xan does. Occasionally, a melody that Mac rocks might be kind of cute. Like, on the intro track, the very heavenly “Come Back to Earth”, but always, time and time again throughout this record his execution leaves so much to be desired.

There are some moody low-key jazz rap cuts on this thing that go over pretty well. Like, “Hurt Feelings” or the kind of silly “Small Worlds”, cuts where Mac's bars they may be understated, but his sense of humor and his wordplay really shine through. But these tracks are maybe the only two that I enjoyed from front to back. While his rapping on the rest of the record isn't usually that bad, he consistently gets in the way of his own good ideas by delivering this awful singing, where again he's coming up short vocally and melodically, sometimes even getting in the way of some of the better instrumental ideas on this record, like the detuned ambience of the song “Wings”.

Mac pretty much plays the role of wet blanket on this album, taking away more than he adds to the record with this like soul-crushing sense of listlessness. And that's what it is, this sense of ennui. I mean, the record doesn't even sound particularly sad to me, it just feels emotionally vacant. You either get moments like that on this record or spots where strangely enough Mac is sounding kind of goofy, like over the celebratory funk of ladders. Or to mention the closing track once again “So It Goes”.

Yeah, overall, I didn't really care for this album at all. I feel like Mac just continues to work outside of his strengths and shows absolutely no effort to improve upon the very obvious weaknesses that his last album showed. Oddly enough, what Mac has been doing lately reminds me of the maturation trajectory, that sounds really pretentious, but he's getting more mature over time, kind of reminds me of a Tyler, the Creator's progression recently, but it's like Mac on the similar path is somehow getting worse. I can appreciate that he's trying to get more melodic, I can appreciate that he's trying to get more personal in his music. On paper, what Mac is trying to do should work, should be fantastic, but what he actually comes through with on this album is just too blase for words.

DECENT 3
