This is the new comeback album from the Providence, Rhode Island band, Daughters, who we haven't heard from as far as studio albums go for like almost a decade. Not since the band's self-titled record, which at the time was supposed to be their Swan's song, which was a big change of pace from a lot of the noise and mathcore the band had been dabbling in for the first half of the aughts. Even though I don't find Daughter's first two albums to be incredibly interesting, what was supposed to be their final album over here, was easily one of the heaviest and most refreshing noise rock albums to come out in a longtime. And not just because of the fad pummeling riffs and percussion, and the tight performances too, but also the bright shrill sour insane guitar tones all over this thing, which to this day still sound crazy. It's like it puts my brain on fire.

So considering where we leftoff with Daughters, I was pretty excited to hear this new album. I was also pretty impressed with teaser tracks like Satan in the Wait, which showed the band going in a darker, subtler direction. It also showed the band stringing their songwriting out to 7 minutes, which for Daughters is kind of crazy — their debut full-length album is 11 minutes in length. This whole new record is an undertaking in length for Daughters, it's approximately 50 minutes, which is almost twice as long as their last album. Given that, the new sonic territory, the more ambitious song structures, I was pretty excited to hear what this album held for the band. And I'm happy to say, this album was not only worth the wait, but it's also far better than its predecessor.

I thought this record was going to be dark and abrasive, and strange for sure. This thing is like all the cacophony of the last record, but with more body, more atmosphere, more versatility, more influences, not just noise rock, but industrial rock and no wave and art punk. It feels like I'm listening to the spastic explosive brand of rock music that used to permeate the underground in the 2000's, thanks to bands like Daughters. But then it got tossed away into a sewer drain, left to ferment and mutate for 8 years, and now it's grown into a 30-story monster comeback to destroy everything in its path.

The whole thing starts off with the track City Song, which feels like a heavy industrialized take on a Suicide track, or maybe even something Throbbing Gristle would have done back in the day. With these rolling, throbbing, overblowing hits of percussion, which are super distorted clipping. That's paired with some warping rough synth notes, some deadpan poetry, and these three simple elements by themselves create such a creepy atmosphere. Already so early on the record, the band has set an utterly disturbing tone. I love how weird and off-putting and flat the vocals are, it's like they're kind of difficult to read, they feel so soulless and so aloof. I love the way the band builds up the momentum with extra percussion, the additional eerie ringing tones and then we get a breakdown of near silence before the band explodes back into this final ugly crescendo. It's like this nuclear bomb of cathartic hideousness. The guitar tones at this point in the track are so freakish and deafening, and maddening, they make me want to slam my head through a wall. It's like I'm being slowly smothered to death.

This track transitions very quickly after the Long Road, No Turns, which is absolutely harrowing song features these twanging nightmare funhouse circus organ type guitars, skipping over these marching tomdrums. Again, just a few seconds in, and it already sounds like one of the most messed up things I've heard in 2018. And the band only goes on to make this song sound even more deranged as it progresses. The track to me just reads like this internal monologue of snapping, becoming unhinged, being on the verge of a mental break. And the song really builds up some mean tension with the driving bass, the crashing drums, the guitar freakouts. Also loving the multiple phases of this song too, the direct delivery, it has me on th edge of my seat, but I'm not sitting on it, I'm standing on it, and there's a noose on my neck.

The track Satan in the Wait kicks off like one might expected to given the two previous tracks. With spaced out tom drums and grime cake bass and these guitars that are just melting in the mix. It's one of many moments on the album, where we get the grim and fevered delivery of a Nick Cave, but also the poetic license of a Tom Waits. Eventually, this track kind of loses its edgy demeanor and actually blossoms into some legitimately beautiful guitar lines that have a nice sparkly sheen to them.

10
