This is the debut full-length album of New York jazz outfit Onyx Collective, who had been building up to the third installment of this “Lower East Side” series with a couple of EPs, both of which made for some pretty raw and abstract jazz releases — some really rough recording, some fusion grooves, occasionally vocals snippets being laced into the performances too. In the third section of this series though, The Onyx Collective seemed to forego all of those weird bells and whistles in order to focus on their best recorded and most straightforward compositions yet. This record basically consists of a lot of short but evocative vignettes, most of which are in tribute to the personality and intensity of various spots in New York City's Lower East Side, Whether it be FDR Drive or Delancey. There's also a track on this thing referencing the all-too-common eviction notices in the area given the rising rent costs. And even though there are different sources of inspiration for every track on this record, many of them end up sounding like the soundtrack to the most intense film noir piece imaginable. It's like every scene is screaming with tension and lowdown grooves, moving through these tracks is like stepping over a bunch of dead bodies strewn throughout a room, or a really dense crowd of eccentric dancers swinging their way through The Black Lodge.

There are moments on this LP where similarly avant-garde jazz records come to mind, like “The Black Saint and the Sinner Lady” from Charles Mingus, where some of the compositions here sound similarly strained but simultaneously the musicians have like this really loose and fluid connection to one another. By contrast, instrumentally this album is also much more stripped back, it's really just kind of some drums and bass, a sax, maybe on a track you get two saxophones. But the relatively simple instrumental build on this record does not stop the band from conjuring some pretty strong moods. For starters, I kind of love the very curious and sour bass and sax harmonies throughout much of “Don't Get Caught Under the Manhattan Bridge”, which come off very puzzling, strange. And the way they sync up with the drums and lock into these tumbling music passages, it's like I'm watching a crowd of people fall down an escalator in sheer horror, very slowly.

Then, there are some very synced up horn leads on the track “Delancey Dilemma”, which sounds like two cars caught in rush-hour traffic, trying to outmaneuver each other to get to a destination first, it's like an impossible competition that kept me on the edge of my seat I wish there was more to it. The strange horn harmonies do not end on the track “Battle of the Bowery”, in fact they get kind of militaristic, with its marching snare drums in the background, I love how progressively the song goes on, it gets looser, more messy, more chaotic. And there's something pretty menacing about the track “Rumble in Chatham Square” too, the song essentially sounds like a fight scene in two parts, one section with very defined bass and sax melodies kind of trotting and thumping their way over some very sparse drums, it's like listening to two gangs feel each other out before the fight really gets started, like the Jets and the Sharks [West Side Story reference] dancing around each other with knives. Eventually, the drums get more busy, the bass starts droning away, the sax starts howling out dramatically, this is like the moment where the fight is actually going on and a lot of what's happening is lost in this messy cloud of violence. The closing track, I also thought was pretty awesome, it's a very interesting mix of just sounding like a very smart metropolitan New York jazz, but simultaneously it kind of progresses to this very odd and destructive place.

Overall, this LP does contain some great tracks, some great moments, but it does leave a little bit to be desired sometimes. Mostly in the writing and development department. The opening track for example “ONYX Court” for all of its scattered drums and droning bass and super sinister sax melodies, compositionally it doesn't really add up to all that much, the track eventually fizzles out like everyone in the band before practice took an ambient at the same time and now it's suddenly kicking in. There are a handful of other brief and kind of underdeveloped cuts on this record that I could see my way to overlooking if they somehow phased into or segwayed out of some of the longer or better cuts on this record, but unfortunately they don't. And then, there's the cut “Magic Gallery”, which wasn't really one of my favorite compositions to begin with at the start, but as it progresses it's like the song just kind of falls further and further into this totally drunken chaos.

Despite my complaints though and kind of being left wanting more, I mostly enjoyed this record. Occasionally with a song it does feel like the band are kind of building a bridge to nowhere, not really coming to a strong conclusion, but when this record is great it's pretty captivating. I love the band's wild attitude on this album, they're kind of reckless demeanor, also the way that in their music they're able to embody both the highs and the lows of New York City. And that the band are able to successfully borrow from the classic sounds of an artist that the city is known for and building into something a bit stranger, a bit weirder, more modern.

LIGHT 7
