This is the latest full-length album from singer and songwriter Natalie Mering, aka Weyes Blood. Titanic Rising may be the first album from Natalie on the Sub Pop Label, but she has dropped many, many, many records to get to this point — she actually played bass in the long-running experimental rock band Jackie-O Motherfucker as well. And for years now, I've been hearing Weyes Blood songs here and there that I've thought were decent, but there's never been quite enough of a wow factor to pull me into an entire, loving it from front to back. I did enjoy hearing her team up quite a bit in 2017 with Ariel Pink for a pretty sweet EP. And Natalie's last record under the Weyes Blood name, even though I wasn't crazy for it, it was the closest I had come up until that point to being enchanted by her music — her particular brand of psychedelic ambient space folk and pop. Going even further back into Natalie's discography reveals a pretty impressive artistic evolution up until this point, given that a lot of her early works were pretty noisy, experimental, droney.

And now, with Titanic Rising, we have this pure expression of lavish exuberant pop. It's just straight pop. Sure, it's kind of vintage and a little nostalgic in its style and aesthetic. The instrumentals annd the songwriting on this record are heavily reminiscent of the folk pop and chamber pop of the late 60's and early 70's with a few progressive passages thrown in a-la early Kate Bush. There are some indie conteporaries out there with equally lavish and dreamy sounds that I think this record shares a lot of overlap with a little bit of Beach House, especially some Julia Holter. Some of the core progressions on this album might resonate heavily with Elephant 6 Collective.

When it comes to having a voice with character, I think Natalie does have some ground to make up for on this LP. I wouldn't say she has the most recognizable voice in the room, but she does sing incredibly well, she has good range, she also has the talent to be pulling off these lead vocals and vocal harmonies in the background, which I guess if she had a quirky or more idiosynchronatic vocal style, it might come off a bit more awkward. Still though, the instrumentals on this thing are layered so well. They're eq'd nicely, they're remixed cleanly — it's a very panoramic feel, you really get a good taste and a view of all the instrumentation. The perfect amount of pillowy softness to the instrumentation as well, a little bit of reverb, a little bit of splash, just to add some space.

The instrumentals on this thing also features some pretty nicely dynamic swells on these tracks too. It's not just a formless droney blob of reverb, or a hollow mess of nothing, where every single sound is sort of like bleeding into itself throughout the entire record and it just like has no body to it. Between the heavenly pianos and the slinky guitars, the gentle bass, the very simple drums that do drop some very effective fills here and there, the airy organs, the wonderful strings, the color palette on this album is great. Sounds very rich, sounds very glamorous, even if at points it is a little similar to those contemporaries I mentioned earlier.

But one things I think separates Weyes Blood from them on this record are some of the overtly vintage nods she makes throughout the tracks on this album. Like on the song Everyday, where you can hear these very prominent saloon-style piano chords and cheeky handclaps. It's a little glammy too, you can eventually hear these rising vocal harmonies that feels like they're lifted straight out of the Beach Boys Playbook. But even though there is a heaping helping of nostalgia pack throughout this record, I think Weyes Blood combines all of these older pop elements together in a way that feels very modern.

And one more thing that makes Titanic Rising stick out is how straightforward and instanteneously orgasmic the songwriting is. Every hook on this thing pops, even on the tracks that are just maybe like okay. And what's funny is that Natalie achieves this without putting out an album that's really all that punchy or overly aggressive, or anything like that. I mean, some of the best chorus transitions throughout this record feel like I'm just being overwhelmed with sound and emotion, like what happens when you let the flood gates open on a really cathartic cry. Natalie somehow captures that exact energy on the track Something to Believe. Just as we are hit very subtly with this light drum fill and then comes this mountain of what sounds like harpsichord and weepy guitars, and droney bass.

The every song on this thing enchants.

LIGHT 9
