This is the sophomore album of Swedish singer-songwriter Kristian Matsson. And this thing is raw, unfettered emotion, it's just a man, his guitar and his story. Though, there's a lot of great studio trickery and new sounds out there today in independent music, there's still something that can be said, something that's strikingly intimate about music that is this skeletal. Listening to this is like sitting right next to Kristian and he's playing just for you and that's just so emotional. This is a guy who, personally, if you gave him a full backing band, it would only harm the intimacy. Just one guy, one song, guitar, the listener, no barriers between the listener and the song. There are a few spare moments where you may hear an extra tiny, little banjo or a very faint-faint keyboard. And there's a piano ballad at the end of this album. But this thing ain't about fancy instrumentation and arrangements, you got to go out in the city if you want your electric guitars and your electric basses. This thing is rambling and hard traveling.

Not to make this album sound old or Southern, that's most definitely not the case. With this music you will find that there's not that archaic sense of being that is prevalent in a lot of folk music and folk revival. And Kristian most definitely brings a contemporary passion to this old world music. None of these tracks sound tired or dusty. And for the most part, The Tallest Man On Earth stays away from referencing old-time folk motifs. But still, the earthiness of this album is really gonna hit you. And the songwriting on this LP, because there's not much else you can comment on, is fantastically, fantastically strong — great poetic lyrics that basically stand out past the music. You also have some fiery verses that just do not let up, do not let go, do not get boring and even catchier choruses.

And another great thing about this album is the guitar playing. I mean, there ain't any crazy freakin solos on this album, but Kristian has some detailed strumming patterns. Of course, he has some great finger picking chops and pays a ton of attention to the dynamics of his playing: getting loud, getting soft, speeding up, slowing down, adding a little bit more detail as he goes along. The thing is, there's a lot of contrast for just one guy in one guitar.

If we're going to make some comparisons, here's a decent one, Deer Tick. if you're into the vocals of Deer Tick's music or basically the country rock style that they have going on, I think you're most definitely going to be loving The Tallest Man On Earth. And fans of the band Bowerbirds will appreciate this new The Tallest Man album too. But if there's one comparison that everyone makes, that I too must make to The Tallest Man On Earth, it's Bob Dylan. Yes, it's Bob Dylan. But before you get your folk panties in a twist, let's say Bob Dylan evolves more throughout his entire career than a Pokemon. And the thing is, it's not just any kind of Bob Dylan's material, it's not "Highway 61 Revisited", it's not "Bringing It All Back Home". If there's a Bob Dylan album that LP reminds me of, it's of course "The Times They Are A-Changin'"." In fact, on The Tallest Man track "King of Spain", Kristian even makes a reference to the Bob Dylan song off of that album, "Boots of Spanish Leather". But The Tallest Man and Bob most definitely have different songwriting styles, there are similarities there, but just in the vocals. Though, I'm sure people could debate all day about how influential Bob Dylan is to The Tallest Man On Earth, it doesn't matter, it's a stupid conversation. If you're into that Bob Dylan album, then you should most definitely be checking out this.

This LP is emotional, very powerful, very consistent, full of great songs, great lyrics, great performances. And overall, it's just a fresh look at folk without feeling like a direct copy of guys like Lead Belly or Woody Guthrie, or even anybody from the 60s folk revival. The Tallest Man On Earth has put together an LP that just feels like the sun, the grass, the dirt, the sand, just the salt of the earth.

STRONG 8
