The newest and third full-length album from this Toronto based metal 4 piece Tomb Mold is here. They've been making waves in the underground metal scene since the release of their debut in 2017. Interest in th band reached a fever pitch with the release of their sophomore record «Manor of Infinite Forms» — a record that didn't really resonate with me as much as I would have wanted it to. Now, granted Tomb Mold's music sits on the filthier, heeavier, more gruesome side of the death metal genre with The Autopsies and Cannibal Corpse, maybe pushing it a little further in that direction: they're not trying to be too melodic, they're not trying to be too technical, they're not to fuse the genre with anything else, gimmicky or weird or just outside of the usual death metal preview. It's good if all you're looking for is a band that is carrying the torch for a classic strain of extreme metal, it's not so good if you're looking for something new, refreshing, cutting edge, or even all that distinct.

So, I do admit that «Manor» complete lack of novelty did cause me to tune it out a little bit, even if I can't acknowledge that the band does what they do incredibly well — the performances are tight, the production is heavy, there seems to be a lot of attention to detail in terms of recapturing the sound. So, I saw the band put out another record that was getting even more praises, and I figured I had to sit down and figure out if this was finally going to click with me. But no, this album still very much came off to me as basic, but still incredibly hideous and nasty death metal experience.

I do appreciate the band attemtping to vary their sound up a little bit though. like with the ominous intro and acoustic guitar break and harmonized guitar solos toward the end of «Beg for Life», or the pummeling drums and zany guitar harmonies on «Accelerative Phenomenae». Tomb Mold also manages to work in this three-minute, somewhat glitchy, droney ambient interlude that's a tad bit eerie — I guess it might be a Tomb's setting for the next track, but it comes at a weird point in the tracklist, still it's an unexpected detour for the band.

There's also the incredibly slow and sinister and melodic finish of the closing track «Heat Death» that I thought was one of the most powerful moments on the record too. So, all of these varieties across the tracklist shows the band definitely paying more attention to the flow of this album, its progression on the whole. Still though I would argue that the production on the group's last record was actually better than what is being presented here. The sound on «Manor» generally in comparison with «Planetary» is a lot heavier, a lot wider, more presence, feels like a more enveloping sound. By comparison, this new record over here is a lot noisier, a lot more chaotic, it just doesn't have as much punch as its predecessor even if it is a bit harsher. Because there are some passages on this album where it is super satisfying with how the vocals in a very ugly way just swallowed up a majority of the mix. But still, the trade-off with that is there's a lot of sonic and compositional detail that is lost and buried in the drums and the guitars.

Still despite this, the band manages to drop quite a few highlights on this thing. The track «Beg for Life» I mentioned earlier moves through multiple interesting phases. There are riffs on this thing that are tension building, there are riffs on this thing that are incredibly chunky annd heavy riffs that are very groove, and everything around that acoustic breakdown I mentioned earlier. If I had to guess the goal of the title track on this thing, it would be that it is attempting to just sound as relentless as possible, with the drums hitting a nice speedy click on a kick drum snare pattern. The equally fast riffs have a disgusting guitar tone on them. There's also a pretty neat transition into a new riff towards the end of the track that has a trashy quality to it, but it is crushingly heavy.

There are elements of infinite resurrection that feels as heavy as brutal and punishing, but it's like the full brunt of the band's sound and their performances are held back by the recording, which makes the entire record feel very one-dimensional, feel very collapsed. This thing is a beast, it's an animal, but it's chained down — it's not able to just like get out there and rip out your throat, it can't reach you.

6/10
