This is Crystal Stilts' new LP "In Love With Oblivion", the follow-up to their 2009 album. "In Love With Oblivion" to me is a rock'n'roll nightmare. Use your imagination, what would a rock'n'roll nightmare be? A dream or a nightmare is something that isn't all that clear or detailed in retrospect. And I would say that is a good description of this, especially since everything is slathered in reverb. And a lot of groups use reverb on their records to sound larger-than-life. But that is definitely not the case here. The reverb here is used more to obscure and veil the instrumentation on these songs, especially the vocals. Another thing that reminds me of dreams is that there's a lot of surreal and strange imagery that isn't explained most of the time.

The opening track "Sycamore Tree" sets the stage for that, which has a spotty story about a girl in a tree, staring at the main character and then following him to the sea. And the hook says "I wanna know why". And I want to know why too. But this LP doesn't seem to have an explanation for a lot of the whys in these songs. Like, why are you falling through the floor? Why are you going into a sarcophagus? Why are you flying into the sun? All of these weird things could only happen in a dream state, or a very drug-induced haze. The style of music played on this LP to me is a combination of psychedelic rock, garage rock and shoegaze music as well.

The Stilts get a lot of comparisons to The Jesus and Mary Chain. And almost to a fault, because I've seen a lot of people react to this with a knee-jerk and say "rip off". You're going to needle a lot more than Bret Hart gets deep vocals and a little bit of a wall of sound technique for me to compare you to The Jesus and Mary Chain. The guitars and the drums don't even sound the same. To me, this LP calls out a lot more to psychobilly bands, like The Cramps, especially recordings like "Rockin n Reelin in Auckland New Zealand", one of my favorite live LPs of all time: interruptive vocal reverb on that thing and a nice guitar twang that shows up on this LP as well. But Crystal Stilts are nowhere near as riled up as The Cramps. Their songwriting is a lot more slick and depends more on melody than eccentrics. All the rudimentary drum and guitar work, combined with the key, mashing piano and organ playing reminds me of The Velvet Underground's messier tracks from "Peel Slowly and See" or especially "White Light/White Heat". A lot of tracks here to me feel like snapped off bits of "Sister Ray", reaching different levels of chaos in the verses and choruses.

But there's a retro feel that I'm getting from this LP to outside of the Velvet Underground. Something that references psychedelic rock in general, like The Jefferson Airplane. And what I love about Crystal Stilts is that they embody all of these ideas without simply walking down the path of one of them. The track "Through the Floor" is a freaking hit, with the buzzing organ, the boogie-woogie piano, the roc'n'roll guitar swaying back and forth. It reminds me of a zombie themed sock hop. And the track "Half a Moon", though I like it, it displays a fault with this LP. When it moves at a pretty fast click, a lot of the feelings on this thing, the instrumentation, whatever, feels fleeting, because it buzzes by, the detail is lost in the effects. But it's nothing that some repeated visits and some closed headphone listening won't fix.

There's some dark lows on this LP too that are real highlights for me as well. The song "Alien Rivers" is this 7 minutes strawling, disembodied voice, calling out from another dimension. And even though it's creepy, I want to come with. "Flying Into the Sun" is one of the best ballads of the band has ever recorded. I love the way the synths and the harpsichord notes sound on the chorus of that song, it's beautiful. I could honestly go on and on about every track. But like No Age's "Nouns", this thing, like I said earlier, is not going to reveal itself in one lesson. But there were five tracks here that hit me like a brick from the get-go. Like, "Shake the Shackles", where what is catchy about the song is not a mystery, it's right there for all to see.

My only other gripe about the LP is that the closing track is anticlimactic. But that in general to me is what sucks about dreams — you never get this sense of finish or closure, the dream ends when it ends. It takes psychedelic rock further down the rabbit hole.

FAV TRACKS: THROUGH THE FLOOR, ALIEN RIVERS, FLYING INTO THE SUN, SHAKE THE SHACKLES, INVISIBLE CITY, BLOOD BARONS

STRONG 8
