This is the newest full-length LP from pop starlet Lana Del Rey, aka Elizabeth Grant. I have been covering Lana's music for close to a decade at this point. And over this very lengthy period of time, I feel like I've grown this really weird familiarity with something that I'm not even standing for. No matter how much I listened to Lana's early stuff, I just could not bring myself to enjoy the music of the gangster Nancy Sinatra. Never really got the nostalgic old soul obsession with the culture and aesthetics of mid-century America. Also, the cheap and trendy ways in which Lana would fuse these aesthetics with hip hop, the washed-out production, the moan singing, the very subpar lyricism. Not to mention, all the bad girl narratives that typically resulted in Lana's succumbing to the desires of some chud. If that's how you want to live your life, then live it, but don't gaslight me into thinking that it's badass or tragic or even enviable. But that was the old Lana, I think over the years her music has been getting more and more interesting, embracing more tangible, organic instrumentation, portraying herself in a more empowered role in the lyrics of her songs. In my opinion, all of these things have resulted in Lana's last couple of records being her most enjoyable to date. Especially “Lust for Life”, which I actually liked, despite the handful of features on this record that did not really complement the album. Absolutely, this thing is not a perfect record, however it is indicative to my ears of a direction of an evolution that I hope Lana continuing or would continuing on her new record here.

It was exciting to see super producer Jack Antonoff taking part in the songwriting, as well as the production on this new record too, he seems to be everywhere these days. And what set my expectations for this record even higher were that pretty much all of the teaser tracks were incredibly good. “Mariners Apartment Complex”, one of Lana's best songs ever. “Fuck It I Love You”, I love the impassioned vocals that Lana laces into the chorus of this song. As well as “The Greatest”, I love the grand instrumentation on this track and the tune is one of the most solid on the record too. I'm still not entirely sold on the lengthy instrumental passage that comes a few minutes after the start of “Venice Bitch”, which extends the song out to nearly ten minutes in length, especially once we reach the point where Lana's killing time with these lyrics “Wha-wha-wha-wha-whatever” and Jack Antonoff's guitars clucking like an ugly electric chicken. If you were gonna draw the song out for this long, what you draw it out with, should at least be like really good? Still, the first leg of the track is great and I'll say that most of this lengthy instrumental passage is pleasant to the ears, but there just are still some eyebrow-raising moments. There's also Lana's cover of “Doin' Time”, which I didn't think would make it on to this record, but it did, although I shouldn't be surprised it's not her first cover. And as I've said about this track before, it's okay, it's a very faithful rendition of the original, copying over many of that songs fine details, the biggest changes really come in the shape of the more hazy production and pillowy instrumentation. I think I mostly appreciate the song for the way its themes play into Lana's typical style — summer, California, a lot of rocky relationship bars on this track too. And let's not also forget that Sublimes' Bradley Nowell checks a lot of those bad boy boxes that have long been a source of inspiration for Lana's music in the past.

So yes, I was actually excited to listen to a new Lana Del Rey record and I anticipated that it was going to be good. Which is amazing, which is fantastic, because listen, as much as it may seem like it's the contrary to some people out there, it's not like I gear up for these reviews thinking “Yes, another album I can give a negative review to”. I like it, when my life is easy and it's a lot easier when the album that I have to listen to for review 4, 5, 6, 7 times is likable, is enjoyable, that's very nice, because who wants to hear an album that's bad over and over and over and over. So, right from the start, it's very apparent that “Norman Fucking Rockwell!” is going to be a very different Lana album. The elegant strings, the bare piano, Lana's first words on the record being

“Goddamn, man-child
You fucked me so good I almost said “I love you”,

calling the dude a man-child, the turn down, the way she takes down this self-absorbed clown throughout the lyrics in the track, that's the tea, sis. I want to die. Also, all of this is attached to one of the best choruses of her entire career.

We also had the gorgeous “Mariners Apartment Complex” that I complimented earlier, the first whole verse on this track:

“You took my sadness out of context
At the Mariners Apartment Complex
I ain't no candle in the wind
I'm the board, the lightning, the thunder
Kind of girl who's gonna make you wonder
Who you are and who you been”.
“You lose your way, just take my hand
You're lost at sea, then I'll command your boat to me again
Don't look too far, right where you are, that's where I am
I'm your man
I'm your man”.

I'm sorry, but this is not the sad high schooler poetry that Lana was trying to build her name on in the first leg of her career, this is some romantic adult type of stuff. This is caring, this is loving, this is concerned, this is emotionally evolved. It's at this point on the album here and with the song “Venice Bitch” where the pianos, the artistic indulgence, the poetry, the super sad mood throughout this record, it is reminding me of another album. And that's Father John Misty's “Pure Comedy”. Now listen, it's a great record, I don't think trying to make an album that is in any way like that record is inherently a bad thing, and I think there are a lot of vast vast differences between these two albums. Politics being the most obvious one. But if Lana were to craft an album that was a “Pure Comedy” Del Rey, a record that went as in-depth on the feelings and the issues that drive her to make the art that she makes, this would be it.

We have the track “Love Song” shortly after, where I wish Lana did a bit more vocally to sell this song, but it's still a really good tune and the lyrics of the song do a great job of conveying this idea of neediness and the tragedy attached to it. All these references to “would like to think that you would stick around”, “I'd just die to make you proud”, talking about love or basically these shows of affection taking place in the backseat of a car, usually a young lover stereotyped. Throughout the lyrics of the song, Lana seems very deeply invested in the potential of this relationship or this connection working out, but she's also throwing us all of these hints that this relationship is clearly not at a very stable point right now. In a way it's like we're seeing the next chapter of this scenario on the track “How to Disappear”, where Lana seems to be remembering somebody who's a bit of a fairweather boyfriend, he's here and he's not, he doesn't really stick around all that much. Also someone, who seems to be suffering from some very deep emotional problems, kind of dysfunctional, overly aggressive too. And all of these seems to result in disappearance, disappearance of the person, of the connection, of the romance, of the feeling, of Lana. As in the last verse of the song she depicts herself being at home, in a solitary state, two cats, chilling, nobody's going anywhere, she's reached a point of stability just on her own.

The track “California” reads like yet another incredible loving, caring step in the emotional evolution of Lana Del Rey, where she seems to have an incredible amount of love for this person, but also there's some regret there too, like she wasn't there for them or supportive enough of them when they needed her to be. She is telling this person come back to me, come back to America, when you're here, I'll throw you a party, we'll do this, we'll do that, we'll do the other thing and when you're in my arms you don't have to be cooler than you are, you don't have to be tougher, stronger than you are. Because Lana's made the connection in her lyrics that love of a person can be equated to acceptance of that person. It's also worth mentioning that at this point on the album the lovely and tasteful pianos and strings are keeping up, the vocals are sounding pretty good, very mature, very smoky. The sound across this record generally is pretty captivating.

The album does start dishing out some weaker moments here and there though past this point. We have “The Next Best American Record”, which is a song that from Lana has been a demo floating around for some time. Now, we're hearing it in a final form and it just sounds like a song that she would have written like five or six years ago, it's not terrible, but it's not doing a whole lot for me. I'm bartender, some of the lyrics take a bit of a quality dip:

“The poetry inside of me is warm like a gun”,

Okay. But still, I do like the songs a narrative about Lana buying a truck to discreetly travel out, escape the prying eyes of the media and basically hit up a bar, hit up a bartender, where she can just drink the night away cherry coke.

I think the record ends on a somewhat strong note though, with “Happiness Is a Butterfly”, as well as “Hope Is a Dangerous Thing for a Woman Like Me to Have - But I Have It”. “Happiness Is a Butterfly” is a pretty chilling ballad about the difficulty of obtaining happiness, but the track is also about Lana being caught up in this devastated state, she feels hurt, she's making irrational decisions, nothing matters anymore, she's spiraling downward and crying in the backseat and musing about whether or not this guy she's meeting up with is maybe a serial killer and if he was she's already hurt, so that doesn't matter. The closing track here is an understated, but powerful finale that I think sums up a lot of the emotions, the personality traits, the flaws that fuel Lana Del Rey's art, her poetry, her music, her storytelling. But what truly ends up making the song a stunner to me is how emotionally Lana sells this track with some spotlit vocals over those bare pianos, really working through the emotions of the song in a way where the listener feels it.

I really like this Lana record. I loved it actually. It's kind of a long record though, there are some tracks that I certainly think could have been cut — “Doin' Time”, that “Venice Bitch” instrumental extension, “Cinnamon Girl” as a song is just okay. But most of the material on this thing is actually Lana's best stuff.

LIGHT 8
