Featuring Dylan Brady as well as Laura Les, this duo, Gecs, they're relatively new. They're yet to build up a sizeable discography, but they're already making some pretty bold statements in the realms of bubblegum base and deconstruncted club. Though genre labels aren't the full explanation of Gecs' sound though. Of course, aesthetically they pull quite a bit of inspiration from those camps — the Charli XCX's and the SOPHIE's of the world. Music fans will most likely to pick up on those inspirations first. But the music on 1000 Gecs is also an exercise in post modern lo-fi pop absurdism, assembling one of the weirdest and wildest combinations of sounds I've heard this year.

Without warning, this project will suddenly break into the passages of emo pop and dubstep, extreme metal, R&B, drum'n'base, and even the MIDI Madness on the track I Need Help Immediately. There's even a ska song on this project about a horse… I feel like I'm dreaming. It's like if Sleigh Bells had the restless demeanor of Mr Bungle and they were trying to make songs for Death Grips and PC music fanboys, which seems gimmicky on the face of it and some of the tracks on this project are certainly that. I'm not sure how a lot of them will age once the music trends they're based on are phased out of existence. But still, when the songwriting on this thing pops, it pops. And it makes me wonder if Gecs come through with a more satisfying or maybe even a more experimental project next time around. Because even those songs like 745 Sticky and gecgecgec as well as hand crushed they're fun, but their appeal and their impact are kind of fleeting… they're kind of lost in a haze of quirky transitions and genre combinations.

I get a lot more from weirdo pop ragers like money machine, which are super noisy and bright and auto-tuned. I'm also addicted once more to this ska song on this record about a horse titled Stuped Horse. And yes, it is composed like a 3'd wave ska song, but like with every other track on this project, it's fed through this lens of noise and glitch and MIDI. Sure, a few pop punk gutars leads do make it into the mix, as well as these ridiculous shouts in the background — the only thing this track is missing is the horn section. But at the core of all of this insanity, a ridiculous, but compelling and catchy song is there, and I've just realized right now at this very moment, it kind of reminds me of that dude, Adam and His Package, which I don't know, if that's a conscious reference or inspiration, many people have not heard of that guy — he's just this guy who used to make this really lo-fi, weird, electronic pop music that was very punk inspired and dealt in a lot of absurd song concepts.

We also have a sweet and endearing ringtone, which is all about your significant others ringtone that you have set on your phone — it kind of takes a page out of the Hannah Diamond's Playbook in that, it depicts love in the technological age, — ringtones, smartphones, group DM's etc.

While these tracks may be jittery and feel a tad bit schizophrenic in a sense. There is still a logical musical thread pulling all of it together. Not that this album inability to settle on one sound or one idea ruins its 23 minute runtime, nothing really stays around long enough until it wears out its welcome. Also it leads to this project kind of melding together into this fast, sweet, hyper addictive, quick jarring experience that's pretty stimulating.

As is, I think 1000 Gecs is blindingly fun project. But it is a tad bit derivative and going forward I would love to hear more songs or at least more experiments, kind of sticking out of the chaos that Gecs creates. I appreciate how genuinely experimental a lot of what's on this project is, but it would be great to hear something from these two that is a bit more coherent, has more replay power, andrelies less on novelty.

LIGHT 7
