Balkans is an Atlanta rock band and this is their self-titled debut. Basically, this thing is like punks at prom, they're in tuxedos, their mohawks are shaved off, their Misfits tattoos are covered with sleeves. But there's still an edge there. Their shoes are clean, but it's a spit shine, they're spiking the punch, they're hitting on other dudes girlfriends, they're moshing on the dancefloor and they're throwing on The Damned first LP on the DJ's turntable when he's not looking. So, to go with that softer side, Balkans do right very straightforward and concise pop rock songs. They stick to a structure and throw a lot of melodic guitar leads in there. But there's a ton of energy and passion behind it, maybe a little bit of anger as well. And because of that, it feels like they're trying to bust out of this structure or make this old tame formula feel young and wild, and alive again.

I love the production on this record it's tight. The drums are very snappy, they've got a lot of attack on them, little to no release, just like on some of my favorite punk records. And the guitars are played roughly, fast too. But no matter how much energy the guitars have behind them,they never lose their sense of melody or harmony. There's a lot of jangle to those guitars, like on early The Strokes records. But that's not the only parallel this band has with The Strokes, but we'll get to that later. The basslines do a great job of differentiating themselves from the guitars when they're not both in unison down stroking motion. And they find interesting ways to emphasize the rhythm in these songs and propel them forward, which is what bass does best.

And the last thing I want to touch down upon sound-wise, style-wise are the vocals. This dude, the way he sings it, helps me separate this band from other bands. It's not the most distinct voice on the block, but he goes all out. Whether it's on a faster track like "Let You Have It", where he's freaking out aggressively. Or the slower songs where I feel like he's over emoting, as much as he possibly can, he's disemboweling himself and letting his guts spill out everywhere. He doesn't care where they go, as long as they're spilling, they splash. It's like a gallagher performance.

There is not a bad song on here, it's a very solid debut from a solid band. But is every song here amazing me? It does drown in its influences of a tiny bit. This album, in terms of songwriting, reeks of a deep appreciation for The Strokes. The guitar lead on "Dressed in Black", the vocals on "Black Swan". And there are flickers of that influence popping up on other spots of this album. It's almost to the point where I feel like these guys could have ghostwritten for The Strokes on angles and nobody would have known the difference. But what if you're going to show off an influence and everybody does, no matter what they think, why not show off a good one? Because for me those first two The Strokes records, if you're looking for modern immediate rock songwriting, they're two of the best. But still, what these guys do on their own impresses me a lot. They write a lot of transitions in their songs from one part to another. The choruses burst with intensity, they make sure that the verses bring a lot of contrast into the songs, solo parts, interludes, bridges. It's all well-structured. And yet, it's so energetic and fun, you wouldn't necessarily need to pick apart what they're doing musically to get anything out of it.

FAV TRACKS: EDITA V, TROUBLE AND DONE, LET YOU HAVE IT, FLOWERS EVERYWHERE, ZEBRA PAINT

STRONG 7
