This is “The Downward Spiral”, the classic 1994 album from Trent Reznor's Nine Inch Nails. It was the project's second studio LP at the time, five years after the semi-successful “Pretty Hate Machine”, which featured such breakouts as “Head Like A Hole”. This and other key tracks from the record saw Trent Reznor's bringing the sounds of 80s rock and new wave, as well as electronic body music to supremely dark and scary places. And while, his sound wasn't nearly as bold or as challenging, as the artists who beat him to the industrial rock punch, he did show a knack for hooks that some of his contemporaries in the genre lacked or just didn't really care about. However, it would be this very characteristic that would give Trent the competitive edge to take his sound into the mainstream. So, over the next five years Reznor would push his production and lyricism to new heights of depravity, making “The Downward Spiral” one of the most unlikely contenders for multi-platinum status. But, despite being packed with deafening and distorted sonics, I think there is something that is universally remarkable about how unforgiving many of the tracks on this record are. To this day, “The Downward Spiral” makes even some modern industrial and metal records sound tame by comparison. Not just instrumentally, but thematically too. As for one track after another, Trent Reznor explicitly depicts themes of self-destruction, addiction, sex, suicide from a first-person perspective. And he does it in a way that's not only frightening, but also kind of alluring and relatable. Maybe even convincing to more impressionable minds that might read the lyricism on this record as just being literal or like an endorsement of some sort. And while, Reznor has personally struggled with some of the issues that he addresses on this record, it's not like he's exactly reveling in any of this stuff. Much of the time, this record literally sounds like hell. Some of the only parts of it, I feel safe enjoying without question are the storytelling, the expansion of Nine Inch Nails' instrumental palette. The album's overall ferocious demeanor as well as subtle musical nods to figures such as Iggy Pop, Lou Reed and even Prince, which essentially lie under 65 minutes of tortured noise.

Take the opening track “Mr Self Destruct” for example, which is so loud and so oppressive, it's almost at odds with Trent's songwriting ambitions here. As the lead vocals on this track spend a great deal of time buried very deeply underneath these pounding pummeling drums and riffs that sound like a dentist drill pitch down and boring into my skull. Plus, the dynamics on this track, the eerily quiet break in the middle of the song where some key lyrics come through:

“I am the needle in your vein
Iam the high you can't sustain
I am the pusher, I'm a whore
I am the need in you for more”
The volatile drums and riffs come back for one last hurrah on this one, reaching this peak of insanity that sounds like the whole track is being swallowed in this wall of freaky fluttering noise rock guitars and white noise. It is a self-destruction opus and a perfect way to open up this record.

Meanwhile, “Piggy” is a perfect way to follow this song up, a calm after the storm if you will. We have a more understated approach on the instrumental side with some booming, but minimal drums, a deep rotund bass line. And while, Reznor really never goes overboard with the distortion on this track like he does with many others, he does throw in this absolutely chaotic drum solo in the last leg, which is performed very loosely to say the least, he is absolutely shitting all over this track. Either way, though I think it's a bold choice.

Now thematically, things get even more spiteful on the following track “Heresy”, where vocally Reznor sports this zany mocking falsetto, the chorus literally states that “god is dead and no one cares if there is a hell, I'll see you there”. To top it all off, he follows this as well with some slinky dad rock riffs — it's a really insane combination of sounds when you dissect all of it this anti-christian message being mixed with some electric body music, some rock, the freakiness of a Prince song and it's all being fed into this industrial chaos.

The following “March of the Pigs” pushes things even further into sonic insanity with these incredibly tight and fast drum beats and synth beats that are in 7/8, which are lit ablaze by these brittle harsh guitars that burn across the mix like a line of gasoline that just got hit with a match. Sonically, the track almost feels like a kick in the face to all of the industrial rock acts that might have been a little bit more hardcore than Nine Inch Nails like five years ago. Meanwhile, the lyrics of the track circle back to this pig trope, which seems representative of people, the protagonist of the record doesn't really like for reasons that may be logical and illogical. Certainly, there are elements of treachery and deception going on in the lyrics, but simultaneously this guy hasn't exactly shown himself to be a sound and stable voice. The song is just packed with pure rage and hatred and it's kind of hilarious that Trent juxtaposes this against these very short and sudden transitions into harmonious and melodic piano passages, just a very stark contrast and tone and harmony “doesn't it make you feel better”.

Thematically the following “Closer” serves more carnal addictions. If you're not familiar with this track by now, I think you should be, it did put Nine Inch Nails and industrial music to an extent on the map, and it is a groovy multi-phased six minute monster that is equal parts frightening and sexy. It's also a testament to Reznor's talents as a hitmaker that the track got as much mainstream acclaim and also radio play as it did. The sticky lead vocals, irresistible dance beat and fantastic instrumental build make this track too good not to splatter all over the airwaves. As I think any other track with a hook this explicit and keyboards this demented would be denied access. Not to mention the sick way the lyrics of the song seem to combine insane lust and extreme self-hatred. Some of the most remarkable parts of the track also occur after the halfway point too, where the song shifts into this mostly instrumental passage. There are some very creative transitions in the beat turning this thing into an absolute dance floor rager. The sour but beautiful piano leads that play the whole thing out are haunting as hell.

From here, the new wave influences seem to creep back into frame on the song “Ruiner” — booming dance beats and pulsating synth leads set the stage for these extremely bright deafening midi horn passages. It's like a song within a song and various pieces of each section layer into each other in strange ways. There's a really weird bridge on the track too featuring this lo-fi guitar solo and really muddy drums, it kind of sounds like a Led Zeppelin's bootleg or something. The track literally turns into that for a few moments and then the midi horns return for a grand finale.

Thematically, “The Becoming” is an odd transition for the record where Trent seems to be singing about some kind of robotic symbiosis. A mechanical transition of oneself or sorts, it is pure dystopian futurism backed with angular beats and baselines, laced with what sounds like the sample of a crowd screaming in horror. And this new consciousness that I guess is cybernetic to a degree that Trent is singing about is it an improvement — he mentions it, killing the bad parts and taking away his feelings in a way. Honestly, I think you can just kind of read it as an extension of the self-hatred that seems to seep into every corner of this project.

The following “I Do Not Want This” is not one of the catchiest songs on the record or instrumentally ambitious in my opinion, but I think it is one of the most angry and unreasonable cuts on the entire LP, and an essential part of this album's overall narrative. This track sees Reznor essentially in a state of emotional downward spiral he is defeated. He is in this depressive episode that has him so angry and in such a dark place, he is pushing away outside help, feedback. He comments in a very mocking way about being so sick and also a people not being able to understand or relate, people who haven't gone through what he's going through. At this point, the record seems to be taking a hard turn into irredeemable territory like the dark passageways we're going down, we're not going to be going back.

Now, the record does drift off a little bit thematically from this point with “Big Man With A Gun”, which sees our protagonist feeling like he's in the midst of some kind of power trip because of the feelings that having a gun, the ability to kill people with it gives him. Now, this track has been misinterpreted in a number of ways over the years and recently many talk about Trent's intent to, I guess, parody gangsta rap in a way with the lyrics here. But personally, it's not something I really hear even if that was Trent's intention to some degree. Given the records macro picture, I think it's pretty easy at the end of the day to just view this song as being in line with the violent lunacy that is all over the rest of the record.

Following this, we get an ambient interlude, which is incredibly necessary as it gives us a nice breather before the harrowing final leg. This track also gives us a bit of a glimpse as to what Trent would be doing musically on his more abstract releases down the road.

From here, we move into “Eraser”, which features this fantastic, intense linear build and groove, I just love how I can get lost in this song, eventually getting hit with this instrumental dropout in acoustic passage, then an absolutely crushing ending where Trent is screaming “kill me, erase me, smash me”. Our protagonist on this record again reaching this extreme place of finality, doneness. At this point on the LP, we are essentially exploring how far that can be pushed.

On the following “Reptile”, we once again explore these themes of impurity and deception but through the lens of a lover or another person, which is often how humans gauge their worth or how they're viewed in the world. The eyes and perceptions of other people. And the track of course just oozes negativity and is backed with this skipping beat thick kicks and bass some whaling guitar too. From here, we have this title track that provides a very abstract and interesting moment on the record. What's strange is that much of what Trent has done on this album so far is so explicit, so in your face, but here what our protagonist is feeling is obscured, it's muttered, it's being buried behind a muffled strange pounding noisy instrumental, we can't get a clear view of. Reading into it, it's pretty clear this track is trying to tell us our protagonist has eliminated himself at this point. Since, that's the story and that's the angle that may have been why Trent went a little more abstract with it. Regardless though it is a truly menacing moment on the record and seems like the album itself is losing touch with life.

From here, we have the song “Hurt”, where if we interpret the previous song to be what it is, feels almost like a credits roll moment on the album or an epilogue of sorts. Where again, we're going back to these themes of self-destruction, of addiction, but we're doing so in a much quieter, acoustic, harmonious, beautiful fashion. And while it's not as noisy as abrasive or as pummeling as many tracks on the record, I think putting all of this to a very bare and beautiful tune only intensifies the lyrics and the sentiments that Trent is putting forward here. It is a eye-widening finish, but simultaneously this is one of the best written songs of the 90s too — I mean, so well done and so well penned that it transcended Trent in the genre itself as Johnny Cash covered it and sort of breathed new life into the song.

CLASSIC
