This is a brand new record from punk producer, singer, songwriter, multi-instrumentalist, Mr. Jeff Rosenstock. And it's actually not a new record as much as it's a new version of his most recently released studio project “No Dream”. Jeff's 2020 album here was easily one of the most emotional and cathartic peaks of rock music that year. One more notch in his increasingly impressive discography. And I was blessed to be able to talk with him about that record, about eight months or so ago. But something else came up over the course of the interview too and that is the subject of ska music. Specifically the prominence the genre once had in the mainstream and in the punk scene that has kind of dwindled unfortunately over the past 20 years. Now, I want to quickly stop here in the review and say that the point of that part of our conversation and this review is not to engage in any erasure of the many talented DIY ska acts that are out there still rocking today. Really that point of our convo was more about two guys in the same age range musing nostalgically about a time when ska was a bit more popular and culturally relevant, that's all.

Now, I bring up this part of our convo because Jeff's response to the topic of ska was really impassioned, he seems to have a lot of love for the genre as he should, I mean, his old band bombed the music industry, put out their share of ska tracks. He seemed genuinely disheartened in the genre not being as popular as it once was. And as a musician, he has taken matters into his own hands by doing a front to back ska re-do of “No Dream”, completed with punny titles, like “Old SKrAp”. Plus, other cheeky references, such as “Checkerboard Ashtray” and “The Rudie of Breathing”. Now, I should also point out that Jeff announced the release of this project on April fool's and said it was to drop at 4/20. I think that had maybe a lot of people looking at that announcement skeptically. But it's here and it's real, and it's actually very good.

Now, I'm not exactly sure technically and literally how much of this record is a pure re-do and rework of the original “No Dream” with the songs being pretty much the same and the run time being pretty much the same between these two records. I imagine there are maybe some bass lines, guitar parts, vocal parts, drum parts that could have just been copied and pasted over. But there are some new versions here like “The Rudie of Breathing”, I was talking about earlier, that are much more low-key in comparison and clearly nearly everything in this new version needed to be re-recorded and reoriented in order for it to sound as deeply ska as it does now. So, despite “SKA Dream” pretty much at its core being the same record as “No Dream”, these two projects have wildly different vibes. Which I think is a testament to Jeff's great songwriting that you can take these same exact songs, the same choruses and verses and melodies, and transfer them over into another genre and their genius still shines. Actually, with some tracks on this project I would say that's even more so the case. As “No Dream”, which if you have not heard that record I recommend it, is a very loud, heavy, blaring, firing on all cylinders type of project. “SKA Dream” by contrast has a lot more room to breathe. And even more layers to behold between the intricate grooves, the horn sections, the guitar licks, the keys.

What's even more impressive is Jeff manages to cover a wide variety of ska styles on this project too. The slower and more ballad-like cuts from the original “No Dream” are often represented here by tracks in more of a reggae direction, completed with dubby effects. Some cuts present more of an aggressive ska punk style, while others throw it back more to the second wave with beats and bass lines that would feel at home on a Specials record. Now again, if you haven't listened to “No Dream” and if you haven't seen my review for it either, I recommend you do, especially since we are talking about the same songs and songwriting here, we're talking about the same lyrics. I don't necessarily see the reason in reevaluating that on this new version since it's still the same material, it's still the same level of quality in that respect. So, just to put a pin in it, I am still very much rocking with the songwriting on this record. It's still great, it's still catchy, it's still well-structured, it's still laced with Jeff's proficient slacker style lead vocals. But the new ska style instrumentals on this LP just reveal how anthemic these tracks are in my opinion. Like on “NO TIME TO SKANK”. Or “Leave It In The Ska”, where Jeff's lead vocals sound especially great in a more open mix. “Airwalks (Alt)” and “\*\*\*SKA” now benefit from completely retooled, rock steady grooves, the boisterous background vocals on both these tracks slap even harder now too. And there's something new and refreshing about the contrast that comes about on the title track too with this version.

Hearing Jeff's despondent and absolutely heart-wrenching social critiques and observations just has this intense bitter sweetness to it with now these rich horn sections soundtracking them. Meanwhile, the track “Horn Line” is one of a few cuts here. I actually may prefer to the songs they came from on “No Dream” — if you remember the original, while it is one of the slower cuts here given the full throttle vibe of that entire record, it's still very heavy, the sound is still really crushing. But this new lower key delay soaked version gives a totally intimate feel now that I think really complements the song, complements Jeff's lyrics a little bit better. “p i c k i t u p”'s

you will not control
mantras, which I thought were maybe a bit overdone with the crushing wall of guitars on that track, now are quite haunting with them being as open and as naked as they are in their presentation. The jazzy piano improv that sits underneath them, I thought was a pretty cool instrumental touch too, and this is just one of many little extra instrumental bits and additions that brings to “Ska Dream” so much flavor. The honking horn intro on “The Rudie of Breathing”, the whaling guitar harmonies on “Leave It In The Ska”.

Honestly, this whole project reads like a very tongue-in-cheek joke that maybe you and a friend come up with when you're high. But it's kind of a joke you put so much effort into that it ends up being really great, it ends up being awesome. Dare I say in many cases, I may want to jam this over “No Dream” itself. But again, it's a testament to Jeff's songwriting and how good of a record “No Dream” is that you can just take the same LP, the same material, totally switch the genre, flip the style on its head. And yeah, I think it's maybe a little more enjoyable, but the fact that it's even in the same ballpark is wonderful.

So yeah, those are my thoughts, I think this thing totally kicks ass and rules, and is super dank, and is fun, and is energetic, and exciting, and, you know what, I hope this marks a new chapter for the sound and the style, because honestly it's been long overdue and it deserves it.

STRONG 8
