This little compilation involves a history lesson. These songs were recorded during the 60s and the 70s in Persia, or what we know as Iran. Unless you've been living under a rock for the past decade or so, you've probably seen quite a bit of disturbing news coverage, coming out of not just Iran, but the Middle East, the stuff that when you see it may portray that whole area of the world as very ultra religious, very conservative and very oppressive. And that mindset is very-very real, but what we have to do is separate the rhetoric of ultra religious clerics and dictators from what the average everyday Iranian would do. And this compilation is a snapshot of a time when the freedom of expression was a lot less restrictive in Iran, things were not perfect under the Shah or Iran's Emperor (in fact, things were pretty bad). But once the monarchy was kicked out after the Iranian Revolution in '79, things got worse, because you do not see music like this coming out of Iran these days, or at least I don't.

So what do we have in terms of music on this compilation? Well, let me say, to be frank, that a great majority of these tracks are amazing. First off, you have some of these soft, emotive, crooning ballads that just will run your heart through meat grinder. And then, you've got these burning hot grooves that are just backed up with beefy drums and bass, just hard-hitting stuff that just makes you want to move. And some great production and some great sounds. The people that made these songs were on par with not only what was going on in the West of terms of music, but what was going on in a lot of places all over the world: I hear influence from Hindu music, because there is some heavy sitar in some of these tracks, and the sitar is not native to Iran, the closest place that uses the sitar traditionally in folk music is Pakistan (or at least that's what I've read); I hear some African influence in the drummings of flamenco, and the guitar playing and some funk influence, some heavy funk influence in a lot of these tracks. These people were definitely conscious of what guys like James Brown were doing. And I hear a lot of Western pop song structures on this LP too. This thing does cover a breadth of different styles. Though, the music does come from the same place, the same time period, there is a lot of variety here.

Because this music is from a different time, it's from a different place, of course there's going to be this exotic element to it. But I advocate that, because the songwriting is so good, because the sounds are so good, this transcends that whole exotic thing. I mean, you do have love songs here, you do have songs that are sexy, songs that are about revolution. But these tracks, it's not necessary to 100% understand what's going on throughout the whole song in terms of subject matter or lyrics. You're a human being, you can understand emotion, music is a universally understood language. When a song is upbeat, you know it's upbeat. When a track is mournful, you know it's mournful.

This thing will shake up any any music collection. Plus, open the gates for you to a whole slew of different artists. Plus, may I add to the producers and the DJ's out there, some of these tracks would make for some awesome rap beats. If you end up doing that, send me the song.

At the time when this stuff was recorded, Iran's music scene was a 45 oriented music industry. So the thing is with this compilation, we're getting the best of the best of a stack of records that most likely was not all that big to begin with. But even if more music came out of this scene, we live in an Internet age, any of these artists and this whole style of music can be easily researched.

So, with "Pomegranates" you have 16 tracks, 12 different artists among those songs and one satisfied listener.

STRONG 8
