This is the brand new record from UK rapper and songwriter Little Simz, following up her excellent 2019 LP “Grey Area”, which was a short, but bold series of bangers, where Simz both rule bars with some pretty raw production. And also a change of pace from the lush and wonderous sound that she kind of built in “Stillness in Wonderland” off of previously. And now, “Sometimes I Might Be Introvert” is reminding me just how much of a departure “Grey Area” was from “Wonderland”, because this project see Simz leaning back into her love of soul, R&B and more lush instrumentals, but now with a much more grand theatrical presentation. And while, “Introvert” might not be as hard or as overtly aggressive as “Grey Area”, the creative cealing on this versatile and dynamic sound is most likely higher, especially considering Simz is reaching the stars on this LP with these huge string sections, bright horn layers, as well as a really sweet children's group choruses. The content on this LP is pretty rewarding too — it dives into her past, her personal and emotional struggles, her family, love. And this LP also functions as a celebration of women, blackness, art. Simz also is framing her trajectory through her music world as like a fantastical or even spiritual journey.

There are even multiple interludes and passages on this LP, where Simz is being addressed like a very godmother-esque character, which I do personally feel like as a bit much on these spots don't connect on aesthetically. But I do appreciate these tracks for their creativity and the narrative building they add to this record as well. Simz seems is pursuing her passion while overcoming her self-doubt and her tendency toward introversion. These inner struggles are giving the gravity of the crusades on the opening track of this LP with a lot of immense sparkling orchestral instrumentation, lyrics that give nods to sinners, churches, kingdoms, war — which are read like representation of the nagging thoughts personality trades and identity characteristics that are kind of pulling at each other within her. There is a spoken word line on the outro that I kind of think sums the energy of this track up:

“The base is an amalgamation of everything”.
The following “Woman” with Cleo Sol is a gorgeous and jazzy tribute to women in color. It's charismatic, it's classy, it is as flawless as the ladies they describe. Then, the “Two World Apart” is a very laidback intoxicating number with some super sweet, hooky and purposeful soul chops, whose “world apart” mantra is kind of foreshadows the progression of the track narratively which moves from this very ideallic sort of love to something more toxic and distant, with Simz feeling traded in in a way. But still, bouncing back eventually, claiming to be in a better place and living an “artist slash actor” money. Then, the “I Love You I Hate You” also deals with love and hate. There is a yin and yang dichotomy when it comes to Simz' pursue of music on this track, her feelings around her father, respectively balancing feelings of love and hate, and fear, and need, and hesitation on these moments. But what I want to highlight on this track is conceptually and instrumentally this song is a masterclass in song structure. From the storytelling to the way Simz' bars are developed on each verse, and kind of coalesce with these builds of just grand and gorgeous instrumentation. The strings, the horn, the harp are just all amazing, and all just comes together all nicely, and the way she's able to effectively tie her bars into those soul samples of “I love you and I hate you” are just perfect.

Then, “Little Q” part I and part II seems kind of coming down to a memory lane. With these cheerful kids' choruses that are Kanye West's “College Dropout” album all the way. She describes her upbringing and greedy tale on this track and I won't go into single bid of the narrative on these songs, but I will say like as far as the over arching themes of this LP would seem that her introversion kind of gave her a quite focus to navigate these really tough situations. Bringing that together with a hope of a brighter day of tomorrow, it's a track that deals with a lot of pain and tragedy, but also with a lot of triumph towards the end.

Then, the song “Speed” brings up a very boastful vibe to the tracklist, more of an aggression that kind of fits into “Grey Area” way, but with instrumental that has a somewhat softer presentation with these hand drums and some smooth synth leads. While, it is a change of pace that mostly fits into the tracklist and I do kind of appreciate the groovy “pick me up” at this point.

Then, the song “Standing Ovation” is kind of her like Jay Z' “The Black Album” encore type moment, where Simz reflects on fame, what she did to get to this point and what it all means to her. The writing, the flows, the performance on Simz' end is incredible, these cinematic instrumentation underneath is amazing. And the track narratively comes together toward the end, where Simz launches her personal ambitions into, I guess, kind of admiration for figures that inspires her and the vision for the better world.

The track “I See You” is an intimate love number on the record, where I love the poetry, I like that it is low-key, but I think the instrumentals on this one runs a little too dry. There's something about the flat way it all comes together on this one sonically for me. And while, I generally like Simz' rapping, there is some kind of tendency for the mono tone on occasion, which I don't think serves for this song the best.

Then, there is a massive “The Rapper That Came To Tea” interlude that is about as showy as these interludes get with their nods to musical theatre and everything. And I wish I would love these sections on this record, I wish they would blew me away. I do appreciate the ambition they bring on the table, but it just feels so mismatched. However, don't let that stop you from listening this project, I think my issues with these sections of the LP are kind of hyper specific to me. And again, there are aspects of them that I do like. I like that they actually effectively diving up the album's many avenues and sections.

The next few tracks after this interlude are bringing some significant stylistic switch ups. There's “Rolling Stone”, which is an attempt to cold blooded banger with a super minimal beat, a beat that is well on one point and Simz' playing a very low-key from front to back, it is somewhat a trendy sound at this moment, I like that it is attempted here. And I guess it was fine as a teaser, but I'm just not seeing what it brings to this particular tracklist outside and the lyrics. Like sonically and aesthetically it just feels so off the beat that is kind of awkward. Which is also the case for “Protect My Energy”, though I do like the tune on this one a little bit more, this one has a sweet, vintage, 80s synth pop throwback type of feel. The singing is not the best, but the production is on point and I do like narratively what this track brings to the record. Simz' kind of wanting to protect her mental and emotional stability, cutting off things and people that are maybe, I guess, sort of endangering that. Favoring loneliness over interpersonal toxicity, maybe that is interversion that is kind of creeping back in.

Then, “Point and Kill” and “Fear No Man” are two one of my favorites on this record and they come almost as like a two for one deal. The first of which brings some West African influences on the instrumentals, some afro beat horns as well. It's low-key, it's groovy, it's hypnotising and I love the vocal harmonies as well on here. Then we have a smooth transition into the funky drum circle, still drums and chanted group vocals on “Fear No Man” where Simz writes the beat with somewhat M.I.A.'s flow that I like a lot.

The record's really strong finish continues with the last two tracks that kind of shows up narratively. There is “How Did You Get Here”, which in my opinion is just too beautiful for words. The crisp drums along with the elegant vocal harmonies and pianos are excellent. And narratively speaking, this is the fullest and thourough picture where we're getting Simz' kind of illustrating this point A, point B progression from “I was here at this point, I was this way, I was this kind of person, and now I have progressed, I have become the person I have imagined I would always be, I have advanced in my craft”. And on top of it, she also makes it clear that her success and her progress isn't just about herself, it's just not about her ego, she's also kind of pushed to this as somebody who's a student of music, a fan.

Then, the closing track, I think is almost like an epilogue for the record, the moment after the closure where we get kind of a quite and very salmon and introverted sort of reflection that is a lot more toned down and I think we get a little more refocuse on the more personal things in everyday things that matter and kind of keeps Simz' float in dated day with a personal connection with people she's connected. We see almost like a calming some of those internal emotional battles going on as well. I think it's a really great way to finish record up that is a really immense, really impressive, a well put together, and I think her most ambitious work to date.

Now, overall, do I favor this record over “Grey Area”? Not necessarily and it's not to sort of put this record against that one or say this one more superior. When it comes to Simz' artistic progression, I see this record as of more project that is kind of taken from “Stillness in Wonderland” took off. Because even though that record felt criminally short for me, I can't deny the fact that Simz is kind of growing for something big on that project, but didn't quite make it, at least in my opinion. I feel like “Introvert” is like a so much closer to this versatile, very grand, almost like Janelle Monae's “Archadroid” sized kind of artistic statement. Well, actually I won't even say almost, I would say in terms of like grandiousity Simz is very much there. And in my opinion, this thing is not perfect from front to back, but some moments are great, they are absolutely, positively awe inspiring. And I'm genuinely happy to see the potential of Simz' first couple of records in a big and undeniable way on this LP.

STRONG 8
