Originally released in 1968, in the US spent two weeks at number one. Jimi's untimely death in 1970 also makes this the last official record he would release in his lifetime. And also the only experience album where he has full production credits. Of course, this album also contains his transformative cover of Bob Dylan's «All Along the Watchtower», a version of the track that is so popular, pretty much eclipses the original. This record also sports a peppy cover of Earl King's «Come On (Let the Good Times Roll)». But none of that is as important as the big and bold presentation that Jimi's Noel Redding and Mitch Mitchell went for on this record. As «Electric Ladyland» is a double album loaded with lengthy jams, wild solos, surreal effects, unorthodox mixes too, making the first two Hendrix's experience LP sound almost conventional by comparison. Not to mention all the great guest musicians on this LP too. For one, Steve Wynwood's organ playing on «Voodoo Child» really helps make the track. Now, of course «Axis», as well as «Are You Experienced» are both loaded with aggressive, hard, trippy blues rock. But, «Electric Ladyland» shows the potential for the genre fusions when you pull out all the boundaries and try to craft a record that is more of an experience than it is just a mere collection of tracks. By that metric, «Electric Ladyland» is also one of the most formative and significant double albums in rock history too. It beat «The Wall» [Pink Floyd] «Physical Graffiti» [Led Zeppelin], as well as The Who's «Tommy» to the punch. And aesthetically was more cohesive than The Beatles' «White Album», which dropped the same year as well as Bob Dylan's «Blonde on Blonde».

«Electric Ladyland» is also a tribute to its format, as this is a double album with four sides of vinyl, each of which has its own little vibe and sequence. The first four tracks of this record on Side A are some of the most acid drenched. There's the slow and reversed tape intro on «…And the Gods Made Love», which is followed by the woozy and extravagant ballad «(Have You Ever Been?) To Electric Ladyland?». A track that sounds like floating on your back down a red carpet that's unfurling from the center of a giant flower — inside that flower are LSD, sex spots, calling you in slowly. All the instrumentation on this track is so watery and phased out.

Which is then contrasted by the overwhelming and aggressive «Crosstown Traffic», whose chaotic mix and powerhouse lead guitars and a weird panning, I just can't get enough of. The track is as disorienting as the violent and sexual and outlandish traffic metaphors that Jimi packs his lyrics with. But the cherry on top of Side A is the 15 minute blues jam «Voodoo Child» that I've mentioned earlier. Which contains the kind of mesmerizing, eargasmic magic that can only be captured in a jam. The heavy blues rock passages on this thing are incredible, Mitch Mitchell's fills across the track are consistently explosive, the droney organ jam the band breaks into fluidly in the last leg is amazing. In fact, I think this track says more about why Hendrix was great than the ocean of ink that has been spilled about his greatness over the decades. Because he was just a once-in-a-lifetime talent that was great not just because of his technical ability — yes, but also his melodic sensibilities, and, most importantly, his ability to express himself through his instrument. I think, Jimi Hendrix serves as a reminder that musicianship is not simply about pulling off tricks or doing fancy shit, but learning to play something as if it's an extension of yourself, regardless of what that thing is. So, simply put that's really what made Hendrix special, not just his life story and his songwriting ability, his voice, but his almost spiritual connection to the guitar. In a nutshell, that's Side A of this LP.

Then, there's Side B, which is a bit punchier and loaded with some of the most straightforward and rocking cuts on the entire record. There's Noel Redding's «Little Miss Strange», which, sure, isn't technically a Hendrix written song, but the track is packed with his very distinct guitar soloing and harmonies. Which serve as a very colorful and versatile addition to the song. Then, there's «Long Hot Summer Night», which is one of the most swaggered and unique tracks on the project. It contains these wild and weird brash opening licks, bright piano embellishments, as well as these eerie phased out vocal harmonies that sound like a couple of ghosts singing their way through the track. The song is groovy and tuneful, but simultaneously the performance feels like everything is just on the verge of collapsing too.

The «Come On» cover, I've mentioned earlier, is given new life with a faster pace and a more aggressive performance style. This track is more proof of how much of a machine Hendrix was, because his untamed rifts and soloing across the track is something to behold he just does not stop.

Meanwhile, «Gypsy Eyes» has some of the most out of control and chaotic guitar work on the entire record, it's also incredible how Hendrix was able to push boundaries of what conventional guitar playing was and come together with something that sounded so great, so visceral, so colorful, but also quite odd.

Then, Side B coasts out with the sparkly and enchanting «Burning of the Midnight Lamp», which features this mountainous finish of booming drums and angelic group vocals, sight guitars. It's just gargantuan.

Then, flowing into Side C, we have pretty much a reset going on. There's the dueling saxs and guitar leads of «Rainy Day, Dream Away». The spoken word and vocal lines on the track pretty much paint a picture of getting high and relaxing, while it's raining outside and slowly falling into a dream state. The whole thing ends up being a chill and kind of funny setup for the following «1983», which is literally this lengthy blues, psych prog jam about being a merman and chillin in Atlantis. The track also functions in multiple phases too, the intro kicks off with these briny, reverb drenched guitar leads. From that point, there's a fiery build and then a very quiet and contemplative middle passage, which is more about the exploration of this open space than it is about any kind of clear and concise composition going on.

Then, there's the cinematic and explosive final, leg loaded with badass solos and Jimi's singing once again about being in Atlantis. «Moon, Turn the Tides» right after this track is pretty much a one minute noise interlude to calm things down. And Side C essentially becomes like this little three track dream sequence on the LP.

Following this, Side D is like a big fat bow that kind of ties the whole record up. You have call backs at this point on the LP, like on the song «Still Raining, Still Dreaming», which brings back the same groovy and bluesy musical motifs of «Rainy Day, Dream Away». But now, Jimi and company are jamming on these riffs and jamming on these licks even harder, even more aggressively. Jimi's guitars are turned up to a deafening volume on this song, especially when he's hitting some of those high-pitched chords and harmonies, like it gets very shrill. This side also closes with reprise of «Voodoo Child», so you have those same kind of licks and motifs rift on once again, but more aggressively, more volume, guitars are just ear blasting. Side D also contains a fresh original «House Burning Down», which is packed with more thunderous drums and guitars, it's really just proof that Jimi and Mitch and Noel wanted to go out with a bang on this side of the record. Really maxed out «Electric Ladyland's» final moments.

But there's also something kind of shadowy and surreal about the way the rhythm section on this track kind of veers in and out of view. Even sober, I feel like I'm listening to this track high. Then, of course at the start of this review, I've mentioned the cover on this record of «All Along the Watchtower» that also pops up in Side D. And it's such a masterful version of the song from Jimi's vocals to the rhythm section, to how epic his guitar sounds on this track, how he ornately paints melodies around this Bob Dylan's song. It's really just incredible, even for me being like a hardcore Dylan fan who may be at one point, because I've heard it so many times, I might have like pooh-poohed the Hendrix version, because, again, so overplayed, so over-acknowledged sometimes, because with it being like The Hendrix Experience's biggest single , sometimes it does kind of overshadow some of Jimi's great originals. But years on, I do have to acknowledge like it is an amazing cover and Jimi really transforms it into his own song, which I think is about the best thing anyone can do with a cover.

That's pretty much Side D of «Electric Ladyland» and that's the record as a whole — incredible record, classic record, amazing record. Once again, one of the most significant double albums and rock albums of all time. Totally unfiltered and uninhibited proof of Jimi's artistic greatness. And if you're a fan of this record, I urge you to put it on and rock with it one more time. And if you are unfamiliar with this album — what are you doing? What are you doing? Come on, listen to it, it's a classic, it's amazing.

CLASSIC
