It is the classic 1995 self-titled album from legendary singer, songwriter Mr. Elliott Smith. With hushed lead vocals a DIY recording style, some subtle alt-rock influences and very bitter gritty lyrics, Elliott Smith's records, especially this one, helped define the indie folk sound of the 90s. And this album, in my opinion, is certainly an interesting point in his artistic trajectory. This self-titled LP is not nearly as rough around the edges or as scant in points as his previous “Roman Candle” record. Nor is it as instrumentally layered or ornate as his more chamber influenced records like “XO” and “Figure 8”. This record also dropped right before Elliott's big break with 1997's “Either/Or”, which had a couple of tracks cross over into the “Good Will Hunting” soundtrack, as well as the song “Miss Misery”, which he received an Academy Award nomination for.

Culturally, this was just a massive moment for Elliott to be a part of and his career never would have been the same without it. But before we had the fame, we had the self-titled record. Which I think is just about the purest thing Elliott ever did artistically.

The recordings on this thing have a very subtle, but peculiar sound. Sure, they're mostly made up of acoustic guitar and vocals. But the performance style is so quiet and everything is miced so closely. Making these tracks just creep into your ears like a whisper. On top of that, Elliott was able to achieve this really full sound with simply these elements by just re-recording them and then doubling them on top of each other, which resulted in this very cool, soft, mesmerizing, natural stereo effect. Which, I think, also plays a role in some of the narrative themes behind these tracks too. I think the shy demeanor of this record goes hand in hand with the secretive shame of an addiction. The relaxed vibe of these performances also feels like the record is riding a never ending high. So, this pretty much serves as the basic sonic foundation for the production on this project. Occasionally, there's a drum or an electric guitar or a harmonica that comes into play. Even with this record being as great as it is, it's pretty clear that Elliott had grander instrumental ambitions. Once he fulfilled fantastically on “XO” and “Figure 8”. But for the time, he worked with what he had and he used some creative workarounds to make a one-of-a-kind singer-songwriter record.

Now, I do love the simple sound of Elliott Smith, but I love the songs on this record even more. The opening “Needle in the Hay”, I think, is one of his best and most harrowing songs. The intensely strummed guitar chords on this track lay a foundation for the tale of a junkie's very difficult and dodgy demeanor. The second verse seemingly portrays the narrator as kind of slipping into a life of addiction too. From here, drugs and addiction are pretty consistent themes throughout this record and this isn't even the most heart-wrenching example.

The tragic “Single File” has too many references to shooting and heroined account. The writing essentially boiling down to this stupid drug-induced mess the protagonist has gotten himself into. Then, there's “The White Lady Loves You More”, which is a sad, sleepy waltz that sounds like a sweet, sweet lie you might tell yourself, like “this is the last one”.

Meanwhile, “Clementine” finds itself in more of a drunken stupor with these sloshy opening chords, which set the stage for drinking yourself into slo-mo and being woken up, so a bar can close. The verses also depict Smith's kind of reminiscing, making a snow angel, the whole track feels like it's being sung about somebody who is just kind of burning out their borrowed time. I get a similar vibe off of the song “St. Ides Heaven” — the pacing on this track is a bit more upbeat, the melody is a bit sweeter, but the lyrics are still a very vivid depiction of somebody just kind of hanging around the neighborhood, getting high, getting drunk, later getting annoyed by the advice and comments from other people who can clearly see this guy has a problem.

Consider nine tracks deep into the record, we now have Elliott's singing from the standpoint of somebody who is selfishly rejecting the advice of others, something that he was kind of depicting from an outsider's perspective on the intro track. It's just profoundly sad the self-awareness that's shown toward this spiral, this cycle that's happening, and yet it continues. The track “Christian Brothers” is titled after a brandy brand, which sees Elliott's writing about drinking it to take down a bad dream fucker. Now, whether the object of his anger on this track is real or imagined, the song is really about the cycle that this decision puts him in because he eventually ends up being the thing he hated, with his mention in the refrain of his nightmares becoming him.

Sometimes on this LP, Elliott makes mention of the traumas that are feeding the demons in these songs too. For example, “Southern Belle” describes the toxic surroundings of a small Southern town, with lots of allusions to domestic abuse too. Elliott's directly asking the aggressor “how come you're not ashamed of what you are?”.

There are a few other highlights I'd like to point out, like “Coming Up Roses” — despite its very grim lyricism, I think this track is genuinely one of Elliott's catchiest songs ever. Maybe could have been a hit, if Butch Vig got his hands on it. “Good to Go” is strangely infectious too with its haunting mantras “if I wasn't such a zero, if I wasn't such a zero”, which stick in my head like I'm beating myself up over some kind of a depressive episode. In a way, the writing on the track is a whimsical story of a junkie too, junkie infatuation, but what's unsettling about it is that how fragmented and broken their lives are prevents them from being able to build anything significant from this point. Their lust just kind of ends up being another fleeting high.

And if that wasn't enough, the song “The Biggest Lie” comes in to completely decimate and obliterate any hope or good feelings that you may have had coming away from this project. The simple and folksy guitar playing on the song is beautiful, the melodies are great. It is, again, simple, but powerful and the song in the most basic sense is about a separation if you look at it kind of isolated from the rest of the record. But you also have to take into account the standpoint Elliott has been singing from for the duration of this LP up until this point, and the other person he's singing about is leaving him essentially kind of stranded, left behind in this drug-addled world, where ultimately there's no real hope, there's no real life, there's no real survival. Which, sure, does sound very, very dark and very, very grim, especially given Eelliott's untimely death, but this is the picture that he painted.

Not only do I think the production on this record is simple, but great, the songs are fantastic, the guitar work — even though it is quiet and subtle in terms of delivery — is really impressive too. But I think another thing about this LP, even with it being as old as it is at this point, and with there being so many social and artistic taboos that have been pushed over the past several decades since this thing was released, this record still sounds to my ears profoundly dark and sharp because this record is so much more than a collection of great tracks, but is also a portrayal and a commentary that lends a lot of insight to the experience of being addicted to something, having a dependency, being caught in a dark place or a spiral that you don't want to be in.

Now, of course Elliott's talents and discography expand far beyond this record, in so many ways Elliott Smith's self-titled was simply just the start of a lot of things. But still, this album was and is fantastic in my opinion. And if you want to know, really want to know what Elliott Smith is all about in the most basic artistic sense, this record gives it to you with no bells and whistles, just totally unfiltered. I love this horrifying, but beautiful album.

CLASSIC
