This is a brand new album of songs from New York's own nasty Nas, where he teams up once again with producer extraordinaire Hit-Boy, who he's really gelled with creatively for two projects now — the Grammy-winning “King's Disease” and Grammy nominated “King's Disease II”, which I think is even better. And there's even likelihood this series will become a trilogy as Nas mentions in a bar on the song “Ugly”, but in the meantime we now have this a little short run of tracks here to hold us over. This thing is 9 songs, 29 minutes, it's obviously not as robust or thorough as the past two “King's Disease”, not as topical, conceptual or thematically focused either. So, I would recommend adjusting your expectations a little bit on this project — not to say it's bad, it's just that Nas and Hit-Boy aren't exactly reaching above and beyond on this one. Because if anything “Magic” is very much about stripping things back and bringing the listener everything they need and nothing they don't. With a trim series of songs that are as direct as possible. Seeing Nas continue to engage with the instrumental aesthetics, the flows and lyrical themes that made him a hip-hop legend to begin with.

For one, the opening track “Speechless” kind of leaves me speechless, because when that first line hits it kind of sounds like Nas isn't even “current day Nas” anymore, it's like he's been transported back to his 20s. And here I was thinking that classic timbre in his voice was gone, but it's back once again like magic. Of course, Hit-Boy's grooves on the beat are tight and have a great sway to them. The ringing, delayed and layered guitar harmonies on the beat are a nice touch too.

The following song “Meet Joe Black” is smooth, mystical and smart. For Nas pretty much an open challenge to anyone looking to try him artistically. That “fuck around and meet Joe Black” line is pretty hilarious on the hook. The song also serves as a reminder of his status as a pioneer and a trendsetter, making mention of his influential Queensbridge Chain. Meanwhile, “40-16 Building” sounds like a braggadocious banger from the bling era, packed with imagery of his youth, drug fiends contrasted against the modern day spoils of his work ethic. There are similar angles to the song “Hollywood Gangsta” as well, with Nas also painting himself as a being more down to Earth than some of these famous rappers who have lost touch with their past. Hit-Boy's punchy drums and slinky lead melodies on the beat are great too.

The chemistry between Nas and A$AP Rocky on “Wave Gods” isn't off the charts necessarily, but it's there. The DJ Premier's cuts all across the beat are fantastic too. Meanwhile, “The Truth” is a pretty grim cut that reflects on the long debated topic of honesty in hip-hop, with bars from Nas talking about how he's seen and experienced basically everything that somebody can in his position and that there's no line any mention of anything, any over exaggeration that could impress him at this point.

Then to close things up, we have the aspirational “Dedicated”, which shows that even a guy as accomplished and as old as Nas is at this point still has goals, still has hopes, still has things he wants to attain.

So yeah, there are quite a few highlights across this tracklist, frankly the worst this record gets is when you get a track or two that are just frankly a little too mild, like “Ugly” or “Wu For The Children”, which I was hoping would bring kind of a Wu-tang's style song or reflect on the impact of Wu-Tang or that era of hip-hop a little bit more, but it just kind of doesn't.

Still having said that and considering that Nas and Hit-Boy are sort of operating in a lower gear on this project, they're still coming across talented, still coming across hungry and if this is how they sound as they're kind of lounging back and running a victory lap off of “KD II”, I'm pretty excited for “KD III”. As far as Nas' recent works go, I don't think this thing is as interesting as “KD I & II” obviously, but certainly better and a little more consistent than “Nasir” was a few years ago.

LIGHT 7
