This is a brand new LP from a blossoming screamo four piece from Connecticut, foxtails. This may be the first time I'm talking about the band and their music, but this is a far from their first rodeo with this being their fourth full-length LP, I believe. And from the sound of this record, I think they are easily one of the more under-appreciated bands out here right now. Mostly because they're bringing such a versatile, dynamic and ferocious sound on this project. The band's style covers multiple bases from aggressive blends of screamo to somewhat mathy midwest emo and post-hardcore. And as an added bonus, the band recently saw the addition of violinist Jared Schmidt, which has now brought many of their tracks a sort of a chamber quality. Of course, strings being used in rock music with emo leanings isn't completely unheard of, even in Connecticut, you could take a look at The World Is A Beautiful Place for example. But “fawn” doesn't really bring the large-scale post-rock builds that they and some other bands from the scene were bringing last decade for a minute. Really, the purpose of the violin on these tracks is to add a touch of counterpoint or some subtle reinforcement to the already moody rock passages and transitions and heavy aggressive climaxes. The band's standout characteristics don't end there though, take a look at singer bassist Megan Cadena-Fernandez, who honestly has one of the sickest screams I've heard in a minute.

They pull off some great convincing cleans too without dipping far into that nasally stereotypical emo timbre. And lyrically, I would say Megan pretty much meets and exceeds screamo's standards for very poetic and flowery, but also anguished lyricism. Like for example on the track “ataque de nervios”:

“Play dead for fun, strategically withdrawn
At odds with a longing for closeness, I'm lost”,
and

“Impeccably preserved, yet never reassured
Pining away, I will never be pure”.
This and other moments on the record are legitimately devastating. Especially with the menacingly heavy guitars that finish off this track right after. Megan also sounds very comfortable on this record, delivering despondent spoken word passages over a very slow moving rock instrumentation a-la Slint. And not to shift too much focus away from the drums and guitars on this LP, because they're honestly pretty great as well and serve as a strong backbone for pretty much everything here. Whether you're picking up on the subtle and mathy groove switches in the first “life is a death scene, princess” or whether you're being completely pummeled by the barrage of hardcore riffs or blast beats on cuts such as “gazelle”. But most importantly, all of these various parts weave together into multi-faceted songs that aren't too long-winded, rarely if ever feel stale. They're always progressing, planning their next move or moving towards some great tension release or maybe gorgeous instrumental passage.

Now, I'll quickly get into what's probably my biggest issue with this record overall and that's some of the performance blemishes on these songs that I think could have been smoothed out with additional takes possibly. There are some transitions on these tracks, where the guitars drums and even strings don't sound as tight, don't sound as together as they could, which I think is pretty important because there are a lot of stylistic and emotional shifts throughout these songs, with the band often changing pretty rapidly from some crushing, heavy, just completely punishing passages to stuff that's a lot more subtle and low-key. I will say, that only happens every once in a while though, the band really is on their shit when it counts like on the progressively speedy riffs on the second half of “space orphan”. Or the crushing guitar bass and violin layers that come right after. And vocally, I think Megan's cleans can be a little off pitch here and there too, especially on the song “star-crossed”. But meanwhile, on a track such as “gazelle”, they're completely nailing it. Not to mention the desperate and bone-chilling shouts delivered on “gallons of spiders went flying thru the stratosphere”.

Then again, there's the violins, which I do think add an essential flavor to this album's character, but the counterpoint they're adding on any given song can vary from bold to sort of bland. Much of the time, the violins are adding a certain artsyness or emotional depth and weight to these songs. Especially on “catalyst” and “space orphan” and the “so it goes” interlude. But then, once more with the song “star-crossed”, we have string passages that mostly hang there kind of awkwardly, merely following along with whatever the guitars are doing, not really bringing much in terms of a different melody, a different angle, anything. Now, I'm not entirely surprised that this is the case for at least a couple of tracks on this record, because it's not like there's a really deep, obvious history of strings in screamo music to pull from, like dozens of records so to speak.

So, the band is doing some quick math here, especially with this being their first full album with Jared on as a member. But even with the addition of violin being a small shot in the dark for foxtails on this record, I think it mostly pans out into a big positive. So yes, in some respects, while I think this record is a tad bit rough around the edges — some of the performances fall flat, a couple of them, and the mixes aren't superb. Beyond that though, “fawn” still has so much going for it in terms of songwriting, song structuring, lyricism, riffs and instrumental makeup, as well as the overall flow to this record as well. I kinda think this thing's a breath of fresh air for screamo right now generally if I'm being frank.

The closing track on this record, I think is as strong, a final statement you could ask for. Megan's manic spoken word and monstrous screams are pushed to the brink. The fast-paced guitars and string licks that come after have almost a classical thrust to them. And the breakdown that closes things out is easily the most massive on the entire record.

What a great introduction to a band that at this point is pretty much flooring me, but still sounds like they have so much room to grow and so much potential to look forward to.

DECENT 8
