This is the newest full-length LP from singer and songwriter Josh Tillman, his fifth under the Father John Misty moniker and one of my most anticipated records for this year. Long time viewers will remember that Tillman's dystopian meditation on the future of our species and our planet “Pure Comedy” in 2017 was my album of the year — the winding and lavish songs and somewhat doomer commentary throughout the record did hit for me pretty hard at the time. Though, I can understand as the years have drawn on, many people may feel the record to be a bit heavy-handed and much prefer “I Love You, Honeybear”, thanks to many of its strong direct and standout songs. But personally I've been wondering how Tillman would eventually follow up “God's Favorite Customer” in 2018, his last LP where his focus very much shifted to his own feelings of depression during a very dark time in his life. And now, several years later, the next step in Tillman's catalogue comes in the shape of “Chloë and the Next 20th Century”.

Now, I will say this record in some ways does feel like a bit of a return to form, like “Honeybear” for example, this thing isn't bogged down in too many over arcing themes that all the tracks across the record need to apply themselves to. And generally, there seems to be more of a focus on covering different sounds and stylistic bases, colorful instrumental palettes. Look no further than the intro where Josh is painting another one of his cheeky character portraits, where he goes on to describe a woman he's singing about as a socialist. And is apparently being prescribed benzedrine for her shoplifting habit. The instrumental and delivery on the track adds sort of a deafening irony to the whole recipe, because obviously the track is not the most flattering portrayal of a person or a romantic dynamic, but Josh is still singing about this individual in a very loving way and the backing instrumentation sounds like some very vintage show tune jazz, completed with heavenly strings and trumpet leads that date back to World War II. For sure, it's a trip, but still very much a cartoonish one. I cannot deny that Tillman is very much committed to the beat, he is playing out on this track, I just don't think it's a great beat, it's like the musical equivalent of dusting off “Who's on First?” and really adding nothing to it outside of a fleeting toxic romantic dynamic.

I much prefer the following track “Goodbye Mr. Blue”, which does feature more heavenly string work, but this time underscoring very gentle plucky acoustics that have somewhat of a country flair. There's definitely something purposeful in how idyllic the music sounds because it provides a sharp contrast from the very heartbreaking story contained within. Tillman's singing about this dying cat he's taking care of, which is also like the last remnant of a relationship that was broken up long ago. And the song “Kiss me (I Loved You)” is just a non-starter for me, completely because there's this awful tremolo effect on Josh's voice that makes it difficult to engage with his singing or really the narrative of the track in any way. I really just have no clue as to why this was the direction to go. The vocals are kind of buried and distant on the song everything but her love as well. Though, I can sort of see why in this instance, because the lyrics are fairly surreal and dreamlike, but like most odd thoughts your brain might cook up in a sleep state, it's kind of difficult to glean much from it or attach strong feelings to it, even if there is this tragic sense of love lost by the end of the song. Then, there's “Buddy's Rendezvous”, which is a very melodramatic, somewhat jazzy spotlit ballad that is very much along the lines of a Harry Nilsson or some early Tom Waits, maybe even some Randy Newman, who sounds like a prime influence in certain pockets of this record. And there are some parts of this track that honestly are too sentimental to bear, like whatever happened to the girl I knew. The instrumentation sounds like something straight out of a Turner Classic Movie that has supporting characters that say stuff like “ah, wise guy, eh”. But seriously, the song does add up into a pretty touching tale? Told from the perspective of a deadbeat dad, who is seeing his daughter growing up before his eyes, seems to have been disconnected from her for years and is now seeing her as an adult with aspirations to be a star and sing. There's even a version of this track floating out there that's performed by Lana Del Rey just to give you an extra sense of the era culturally and aesthetically the song is trying to pull from.

We get a change of pace on the song “Q4”, which is essentially some very bland psych baladry and pastiche, packed with tons of harpsichord and lush string layers. The measured vocal performance from Tillman holds the song back from its full potential, but I guess there is something to it. Frankly, I'm more disappointed with the song “Olvidado”, which sounds like some vintage gentrified Hollywood soundstage bossa nova, that stinks like a musty shag carpet. And if you thought this track was trying to get high off the fumes of a bygone era, listen to “Funny Girl”, which I do genuinely think is a more entertaining track with its various jazz embellishments, cinematic orchestrations too, personally I like to imagine the song as being sung from the perspective of the joker thinking about a female comedian that he's romantically obsessed with, which is probably not the artist's intent and maybe more work than required on my part, but I went to this record really wanting to enjoy it and god damn it, I'm gonna try anything I can at this point.

We then get the slightly charming “Only A Fool”, which is essentially some very predictable ballroom jazz with a bridge that is in desperate need for a proper solo, like some horn harmonies and light banjo is not cutting it here. And I suppose the sentiment and story of the track overall is cute about love being able to make you smarter, change your perspective.

So, much of the record up until this point is pretty much spent tumbling through the cheapest tchotchke in the dustiest antique store on main street. But still, we do get a somewhat interesting landing with the closing tracks. “We Could Be Strangers” tells the story of a couple that are seemingly at each other's throats. Over an eerie instrumental, there are some musings on the song about being alone, trying to hold on to some sense of peace and happiness in the midst of this very bad dynamic, but then it's revealed in one lyric that they may in fact be like bleeding in the midst of a car wreck or something, so I guess this whole exchange is happening while that's occurring. Which narratively is a sick idea, I just think the pacing and the tune of this one are kind of tedious. “The Next 20th Century”, the closing track is an odd moment instrumentally, because it does kind of bring back a very faint bossa nova beat that drones very quietly in the background that is until we get this huge rush of like burning distorted electric guitar, lyrically Tillman brings a lot of evocative imagery that comes off pretty fragmented on the surface, be it Val Kilmer, or a stalker of some sort a nazi wedding band. Eventually it does kind of solidify into a commentary on Josh's unhappiness generally with the now, and sort of dreading the future of this “Next 20th century”, saying things like:

“I don't know about you
But I'll take the love songs
And give you the future in exchange”
“If this century's here to stay
I don't know 'bout you
But I'll take the love songs
And the great distance that they came”.

And I don't entirely disagree with Tillman or this record on this point, the current state of many things right now is awful, is terrible, which is most likely why this record is so desperate to live in the past.

But with that being said, you can't live in the past, you can't, it's undoable. Plus, on top of that, the past sucks. I could literally make a running list of all the things about the past that were total ass, specifically the era culturally that this record is pulling from. I mean, for sure it would be appealing in some sense if we could go back to that time and be that Rock Hudson type person, the suavest guy in the room who everybody wants to be a part of his life, his circle. But that's not how existence was for most people during that time. So, I don't know I kind of feel like this LP is an unfortunate one for Mr. Tillman, especially with many of the songs being so forgettable and many of the instrumental aesthetics feeling like this desperate put on.

STRONG 4
