This is the new LP from singer, songwriter, multi-instrumentalist, Mr. Daniel Rossen, known for his tenure as a key song smith in the legendary indie and neofolk outfit Grizzly Bear. Their last record came out back in 2017, which wasn't bad, but also I didn't think was one of their best either. Personally, I haven't been totally head over heels for a Grizzly Bear album since like “Yellow House”. And not to totally dismiss the material that came afterwards, I mean “Veckatimest” is a really a water mark for indie generally. But still, there's something just so uniquely lush and dense and wondrous and even spellbinding about that “Yellow House” record, it's so vast and large and winding, but also incredibly catchy, the various guitar and woodwind arrangements all around the record, vocal arrangements all around the record, are elaborate, beautiful. But still, stick with me in a way that makes them feel sharp and accessible. And it's this exact era of Grizzly Bear's career that I was getting a sense of in the teasers to this new record. “Shadow in the Frame”, “Unpeopled Space”, lengthy multifaceted fault cuts with ornate arrangements, pretty much all of which are played by Daniel himself. But part of Daniel's creative process on this project apparently was just gathering all of this instrumentation and writing and composing around it and just performing it all himself, regardless of what his level of experience with each instrument was. And it's actually kind of astounding that some of the most beautiful and magical moments on this record are not just conceived by one guy, but performed by one guy. Especially since the recordings and mixes on this record don't really come across stiff or even claustrophobic as some solo and bedroom recordings may. Especially “Shadow in the Frame”, the finger-picked classical guitar lines on this one keep a great pace, the dynamic swells of drums and woodwinds surrounding the guitar are stellar, the opening lyrics to the track right here are a perfect fit:

“Here once again
Just following tracks through frozen oil
Where once we ran
Love in mind”,

because there is something about the momentum of the track that feels like journeying, traveling. Plus, the eventual allusions to the truth, the earth shaking and this place being wild beyond control, which feel larger than life and I see the sound of this track growing as its concepts grow in the lyrics. I also love how the instrumental on this one undergoes this rollercoaster type progression, growing and falling and growing and falling until it hits this a really large thick crescendo at the end.

And then, “Unpeopled Space” is another example of lengthy, winding and sort of progressive folk songwriting, but this time with a much darker chord progression, some more urgent pacing and arrangements as well. And lyrically, there's a bitterness to it too, reading into lines like

“Ten years gone, was it worth it?
Is the answer clear?
And after all, and after all
Nothing's lost, when there's nothing”

Further lyrics on the track display a sense of hopelessness. The woodwind harmony passages are great, the drumming is impressive and intense, and some of the syncopated guitar and rhythm transitions feel like something off of a Jethro Tull record.

So yeah, those two tracks in my opinion are fantastic introductions to this album, which going into it I was kind of hoping for really more of the exact same from front to back. But I was a little surprised to find the album flow to be just a bit choppy. You do have these moments that are just massive and lengthy and enthralling from front to back, like the teasers I just mentioned. There's also “I’ll Wait for Your Visit” with the instrumental passages on this one changing like the seasons, twangy sparkling arpeggios, nimble classical guitar, more woodwinds, more vocal harmonies piling on at key moments. And damn, that ascending bridge with all the rolling drums and pianos, it's actually really impressive how flawlessly executed some sections of this record are. There's a real virtuosity to it that was there in subtle moments on past Grizzly Bear records, but didn't really quite show up as boldly as it does here, especially with the guitars being plucked so fast on this one, it's like hearing raindrops on concrete.

There's also “Keeper and Kin”, which is the other lengthy track on the record, but this one stylistically is a bit of a different beast. It comes across mostly like an acoustic meditation drenched in reverb and topped with these very-very close vocal harmonies that are a little bit grading and feel almost artificial in a way. Can't quite explain it, but they do take away the more likable qualities of Daniel's voice that I hear in a more kind of stripped back or naked context on the rest of the record.

So yeah, all of these tracks are kind of the big boys of the record, which are mostly very exciting and gratifying, but then you have the shorter cuts on this thing, which are a bit more of a mixed bag. The intricate guitars on “It's a Passage” are some of the best on the entire record, really a wonderful first taste of the instrumental firepower that Daniel was bringing to this thing, but the abrupt ending does leave me a bit cold even if the closing lines are pretty fitting in terms of presenting this track as like a passage to this entire record. The title track is also a great display of this album's performance dynamics, the way the drums, pianos and guitars really create this earthquake type rumble. I do enjoy the track as a moment as a sound, as a motif, but as a song, not really. I have a similar struggle with the track “Celia” too, with its intensely slow and somber guitar and horn layers, there is something so dark and intense and subtly jazzy about it that I like, however the progression on this one brings a lot of tension but not necessarily a whole lot of release. The song “Tangle” though is a shorter cut too, but this one has an experimental post minimal free jazz quality to it that's pretty thrilling, actually kind of mind-blowing there is something so open and so wild and out of control about it, especially with Chris Bear's drumming in the mix. The theatrical vocal passages and marching drums that crop up in the second half make for a great transition too, this one's definitely a highlight for me.

There are some admirable closing moments on the LP as well. “The Last One” for example has some of the most heart-wrenching lyrics on the entire LP, really about a needy and sort of unrequited love. Plus, the instrumental rush on this one that hits when Daniel sings “back when I was strong”. But yeah, ultimately this track is another great song with a progression that feels so free so unbridled, but yet also focused on where it needs to go. And the closing track is another interesting yet also beautiful moment on the record, the way it's kind of cheeky verses transition into these very grim and heavy I don't even know if you'd call it of course necessarily I suppose it is, but it does transition into a part B that isn't necessarily catchy per se, but there is such an intense instrumental and tonal shift to it in these changes that like that in itself is incredibly stunning and leaves a mark, leaves an impression. In a way feels like something out of a Tim Burton movie, you do eventually get these very clear refrains of “repeat the pattern”. And there's something tragic about this narrative shift here, not just instrumentally but lyrically. It's like Daniel has lost something in the midst of this journey called life. And he is kind of painting with his words this picture of life's cycles kind of grinding on, despite these sad occurrences. Plus, his closing words on the track feel like just a very sad purgatorial kind of afterthought for the entire project.

But yeah. overall even though I did find there to be a bit of a night and day difference in terms of like intensity and quality between some tracks dependent on their size or their length or how willing Daniel is to kind of flesh the ideas out that he's presenting on these songs. Still, I did find this record overall to have way more hits than misses. Certainly a bold display of Daniel's incredible talents as a songwriter in the most raw and direct way that I think he could present them at this point in his career. I mean, this is just my opinion, but I feel like this project really does kind of blow some of Grizzly Bears catalog, at least some of it out of the water. And I also have a feeling this is going to be a record too that I'm going to be able to return to and just kind of unfold a bit like an onion time and time again and kind of hear new sounds, new subtleties, new things being said in the lyrics that I might not have picked up on before that might have come across a bit esoteric at first. But yeah. beautiful album, skillful album, dynamic album, and hopefully now that Daniel has what he's done here pretty cemented and he has maybe created a process around it, we hear another solar record sooner rather than later, because this was definitely a treat for somebody who's been waiting a while for another Grizzly Bear type or something.

LIGHT 8
