This is a brand new LP from coke rap kingpin, Good Music president, one half of the legendary duo Clipse, Mr. Pusha T. I was pretty psyched for this new record for a number of reasons. This thing touted a lot of production from Pharrell Williams, as well as Kanye West. Which how could you go wrong with that? Especially with Kanye having produced Pusha's last album “Daytona”. And that record was so damn good, one of the most celebrated hip-hop albums of the last decade. And Pharrell and Pusha obviously have a lot of history, going back to those days of Clipse. And while Pusha has certainly proven over the years that he can rap over just about anything, there is something special about the chemistry that is created with him over a Pharrell's beat or The Neptunes' beat. And another reason to be excited for this project is Pusha himself has come such a long way since the days of “Lord Willin'” and “Hell Hath No Fury”. When him and his brother went separate ways, Pusha's initial attempts at transitioning into a solo career were a bit rough, like 2013's “My Name is My Name” had just about as many lows as it did incredible highs. But Pusha's consistency across an entire album seemingly has improved as the years have drawn on, coming to a head several years ago with his last project “Daytona”.

And I was kind of hoping for something in a similar realm of consistency with “It's Almost Dry”. Which after having heard it, I do think it is one of his best records so far, even if the flow is a little choppy. Because switching back and forth from Ye to Pharrell production doesn't exactly make for the most cohesive listen. Even that song “Hear Me Clearly” off that record brought together by A Bathing Ape's Nigo that dropped earlier this year, that made it onto “It's Almost Dry” too. And it is a track I do appreciate, it's certainly more barred up than the initial single to this entire thing, “Diet Coke”. Classic Pusha for sure, but the beat is easily one of the weakest here, also the track does kind of end somewhat unceremoniously with it just fading into the ether all of a sudden. Some of the features on this thing are just okay as well or maybe just not really all that complementary to Pusha T and his sound. Kid Cudi's chorus on “Rock n Roll” for example is strained as hell, far from his best vocal performance. And Kanye's performance on his song verse is smoother, but not by much. However, Ye does provide a bit of a mini narrative on this record with his verses here referencing what he's going through currently with his divorce, he also goes into this a bit on the end of dreaming of the past where he mentions the family being in danger when daddy's not home, which is frankly a little controlling. But yeah, the best thing “Rock n Roll” has to offer are these chipmunk soul chops and Pusha's opening verse, pretty much everything about it outside of that I could take or leave. And as long as I'm complaining, I'll mention the track “Scrape It Off”, which features Don Toliver, as well as Lil Uzi Vert, who stylistically and lyrically are not the best fit with Pusha, especially with cringy throwaway lines like:

“Man, my buzz light like Woody”.
Don Toliver himself vocally is fine, I'm just starting to feel more and more cold to the one single delivery that he pretty much hits every feature that he does with, it's getting a little stale. The bassy mystical beat is nice and while Pusha on the back end of the song is fine, it does take a while to get to that point and I wouldn't really put this verse in like a top five list of lyrical moments on this record. I guess, for Pusha I just expect better considering how little records he puts out, how long it takes to make an album. And this one over here is also pretty short, it's trim, it just 35 minutes or so, so not a lot of wiggle room to drop cuts that are just mid.

Now, thankfully, the rest of the material on this thing is pretty strong to one degree or another. The opening track “Brambleton”, the eerie keys and bassy beat on this one are classic Pharrell. And they've set a perfect tone for Pusha to rap about the treacherous memories of a dealer's past, friend shot to death, federals watching, cutting deals, cop and quarter pounds from the border towns, also a reminder to the listeners that the names involved are concealed. Pusha also hits the mic on this track with this kind of deep smoky flow that's almost reminiscent of Rick Ross in some pockets. And I would say this delivery fits him pretty well. Then, there's “Let the Smokers Shine the Coupes”, this one's insane. Like, is this track not a top 10 Pharrell beat? The howling tones and horn samples are fantastic, beat is tight as fuck — it's aggressive, hits hard, but there's also something that's really dancefloor friendly about it too. Pusha matches this energy perfectly, especially with the mention of having gotten the goose and he's jim perdue, also cocaine's Dr. Seuss. Whose track doesn't feature one of his most dynamic flows and verses or densest verses either? But I will say on this track Pusha and Pharrell do come together into something that is greater than the sum of its parts, they just align in such a way where neither of them needs to go too crazy with what they're doing, because it just comes together into something that is just so great, each person just brings what they bring and it just adds up. Like if you're looking for lyrics on lyrics on lyrics, head to the next track “Dreamin of the Past”. Like on this bar where he rhymes about cramping:

“Bruh, you niggas ain't flexin', you crampin'
My weight keepin' niggas on the bikes like Amblin”.
From here we have a lot of hilarious flexes throughout the track that show how funny and expressive Pusha T can be. Also, this one line where he's talking about trying to get the dope:

“There's window stickers and window lickers (I was dreamin' of the past)
You know the type, always tryna get in your picture
I was tryna get the dope through, in your sister”
Through in your sister? That's fucked up, dude. But yeah, he keeps piling it on on this track, not to mention the amazing sample of John Lennon's cover “Jealous Guy” by Donny Hathaway. It goes over very well and leaves the entire track feeling really glamorous and sentimental.

“Neck & Wrist” featuring Jay-Z also has a very chilling Pharrell beat attached to it. I absolutely love hearing Pusha hit this beat with a flow that is constantly approaching this like crack in his voice and then he kind of descends from there over and over. Jay-Z matching that energy in his own way, hitting those cracked inflection points, but sounding weirdly emotional too and just approaching it with an entirely different flow. But yeah, from the verses to some of Pharrell's refrains and the beat, the whole track is just intoxicating as hell.

Things somehow get even more haunting on the song “Just So You Remember”. There's the very generous Colonel Bagshot sample that's pretty much carrying the entire track with the vocal and bass, with some additional drums thrown in for some bump. There's something kind of stripped back and simple about this song too, just like many of the songs that Ye produced for Pusha on “Daytona”. And of course, lyrically Pusha is as deep as he can possibly be in that coke talk, really doing it like he's got something to prove, especially with bars like

“The book of blow, just know I'm the Genesis”.
Now, from here we have the second half of the record, which in my opinion is not as strong as the first. The first half of this thing in my opinion is some of the best stuff Pusha T has ever put out, even the song “Diet Coke” with it not being as lyrically dense as some other songs I do prefer here has grown on me with repeated listens. But even if the second half is not as consistent as the first, there are still some major highlights here i'd say. There's “Call My Bluff”, which also features a Pharrell beat, the nonchalant flows and limply sun chorus and all the coke talk really kind of adds together into that classic clips magic, but with a bit more of a menacing tone to it. The song “Open Air”, also a little chilling and is all about moving weight, big amounts of weight, lots of like talk of moving coke boats, plane, everything long and large distances, that one is pretty fun. And then there's the closer “I Pray For You” featuring Pusha's brother Malice. It's very unfortunate that Clipse did not stay together as a duo, but as of late here and there they have been bringing that classic energy and chemistry back and that is certainly the case on this new track too. And they sound fantastic doing it, especially over this instrumental that is so grand and beautiful and stunning and pretty, has a lot of gospel influence laced into it and the Labrinth sung chorus is beautiful as well. But yeah, even though a full Clipse record is most likely not in the works, especially with Malice having made the faith-based shift that he has over the years, it's still amazing to hear that that brotherly and artistic rapport is still there and Malice is to this day writing like a madman, with raps about the distance from which he has to the lifestyle he once lived:

“Tell me what I missed
New designer drugs and emotions I don't get
I know Hellcats still paddle when I shift
Vietnam flashbacks, I get triggered by a sniff”.
It's a good closer, it's a very good closer to an album that I think generally is very good as well, even if with my biggest gripe here being that the second half is just not as strong as the first.

Overall, “It's Almost Dry” is not as consistent as “Daytona”, but really how could it be with the consistent Ye production and being so small and short and tight and trim as it was. “It's Almost Dry” is bigger, it's longer and there are some positives to that, because I think there are moments here where Pusha gets a bit more ambitious, there are moments here where hearing him team up so thoroughly with Pharrell once again just is incredible and results in some of his best songs in years. So to a degree, at least Pusha T still having those consistency problems, those cohesion problems across the length of an entire album, but still that doesn't take away entirely from the fact that there are some incredible songs here, incredible vocal and lyrical performances. Pusha T continues to prove to this day that he is a one-of-a-kind rapper. And even if his next project has a few flaws on it and runs just like 20 minutes and it takes four years to put out, it's still very much gonna be well worth the wait because of the amount of personality and talent that he brings to each record.

LIGHT 8
