This is a brand new record from contemporary Australian rock legends King Gizzard & The Lizard Wizard. Not sure if there's a new rock band out that I find myself talking about more often than King Gizzard. And that is for good reason, often the band is so prolific, so creative, so daring. They've always got some trick up their sleeve or some big surprise to hit fans with whenever there's an album roll out. Whether that be some artistic excursion into jazz or electronics or micro tonal music, folk, or huge narrative concepts like an environmentalist thrash opus. The list goes on, the band is currently building one of the most interesting discographies of rock music in the modern age, and I heavily envy anybody who stumbles upon it 15 years from now and can just like binge through the whole thing.

So consistently, whatever it is King Gizzard does, they typically do it big and that is also the case for “Omnium Gatherum”. Pretty sure this is their biggest project to date with 80 minutes of runtime, it's a double album. The thing also functions in a way as a celebration of the full entire band being able to get back together after the lockdowns that kicked off the pandemic. So, everyone in this fairly large group was able to come together and write and jam, which makes sense, a complete full band jam is just about the only way that you get a moment, like the opening track “The Dripping Tap”. This thing is an 18-minute multi-phased psych rock odyssey, which in some ways feels like an extended take on some of the stuff from the band's “Nonagon Infinity” days. And after this song came out, I kind of wondered if the rest of this project would be as lengthy or jammy or be as much of an exploration of some of the work in the band's past, especially when their sound and style was a bit more singular and hung more in a psychedelic or garage space. And overall, “Omnium Gatherum” is a revisitation of sorts, but it's actually a touching down on a lot of different things the band has done in the past, even some recent sounds and ideas. Which makes “Omnium Gatherum” less of a new chapter, less of a grand focus statement and more of a very fun and kind reminder of what has made King Gizzard such a compelling band up until this point. Their versatility, their proficiency. So, because King Gizzard has covered so many stylistic bases over the past decade, the tracklist of “Omnium Gatherum” is a little all over the place, which isn't really a bad thing as long as the tracks being delivered are strong. “Magenta Mountain” for example with its smooth soaring synthesizers, groovy beats and far east melodies sounds like something lifted from the band's recent “Butterfly 3000” record, but a little bit thicker, a little more colorful, in fact I do kind of enjoy the band's take on the sound more than I do many cuts from that record that I feel like didn't really push it far enough into the direction they were obviously gesturing toward.

Then, “Gaia” is a very earthly piece of sludge and thrash metal, with an odd time signature and no doubt this track is connected to the material the band was dropping during their “Infest The Rat's Nest” album cycle. Kicks just as much asses anything off that record, but given the very tight linear narrative of that thing, I could see why “Gaia” here wouldn't have exactly fit on that project. Still, it is really awesome to be able to hear it here with its gruff vocals, chunky riffs, epic chord changes. There's another solid thrashy cut in the song “Predator X” deeper into the tracklist too.

So yeah, there are some familiar vibes on this project and some interesting surprises too. “Kepler-22b” for example features the groovy beats and jazzy piano chord changes that I would expect out of like a Robert Glasper cut or something like that. But instead, the song here with King Gizz is topped with a very light dreamy vocals and surreal choruses about looking into space, stars in the sky wanting to be an astronaut — it's cute, it's catchy, it's funky. Then, “Sadie Sorceress” is King Gizzard honest to god doing a rap track, one of a couple rap tracks on this record actually. But yeah, the heavy rhythms and the thick bass and some of the shouty background vocals on this one remind me of like an old school Beastie Boys song. Even some of the organ licks that pop up here and there remind me of the track “So What'Cha Want”. Then, the lyrics of the song are all about this witch and how cool and badass she is and there's one point where she needs to essentially defend herself against some town's people, pitchforks at the door and everything. Then, “The Garden Goblin” is essentially a really weird piece of cheeky hypnagogic pop with sequence drums, very goofy vocals, as well as nostalgically dreamy synths. The singing, I could pretty much take or leave on this one, but I do have to admit it is fitting for a track about a contemptuous goblin that's pretty much ruining a garden.

There are some more highlights to be had here, like the very flirty “Persistence”, likening love and the pursuit of love to driving and endless road. And “Evilest Man” is the second longest track on this project, is seven minutes and in some ways it does a better job of justifying its length than even “The Dripping Tap” does, with the various sections of this track shifting very fluidly from prog to adult-oriented rock, even some chaotic psych. Lyrically, the song has an interesting angle too, talking about the evilest man, essentially being somebody who is poisoning the well societally, creating chaos through misinformation. At a few points the band even employs a Rupert Murdoch of Fox inspired term “Murdochian”, while also talking about just generally all the misinformation of being around everywhere, not being able to believe what you read. There's a strong ending instrumentally on this track as well with all these screaming twisted solos.

So yeah, there are a lot of very good and thoughtful cuts in the midst of this tracklist. But in my opinion, much of the inspiration does tend to trail off in the second half which is kind of a big problem when you're talking about a double album. The track “Blame it on the Weather” for example, I do like the transition the song makes from the previous track, but the falsetto hook on the song is absolutely obnoxious, when we do get group vocals kind of swapping out with that, they are really sloppy, much of the track just kind of sounds like South Park's Mr. Hankey's singing to me. There's also the chill latin jazz on “Presumptuous”, which is okay, it's passable, it kind of feels like I'm just hanging out in a zesty dentist's office. There's “Red Smoke”, which I think stylistically sits in much more familiar territory for Gizzard, some very cavernous and dramatic psych with prominent keys. But man, if the tune on this one isn't absolutely forgettable? The pacing is tedious and the vocals just don't really bring enough presents to take up the space and atmosphere in the mix they've been given. “Candles” meanwhile sounds like a horde of zombies going on in idyllic island vacation, it's kind of cute, but also a little novelty as well. And the morbid and end time themes of the final three tracks of the record kind of come to a head on the closer “The Funeral”, which is really more of a motif and a mantra than it is a proper song and I get conceptually how that kind of works in this context, how that sort of fits as an ending, but it seems like kind of an unceremonious finish for a project that has such a massive start and just such a massive runtime.

So while, in one respect, I do like this record's versatility, I like the bases it covers, I like that in some cases King Gizzard are going back to previous sounds and kind of outdoing themselves a little bit. But in total, this is still such a big project and I didn't find the full crop of songs to be as fire from front to back as I hoped it would be. Still, I do think this project is a must for Gizz fans — it's likeable, it's worth listening to. There's at the very least a normal album's worth of highlights on here, given just the sheer size of this thing. And also on top of it, even though this isn't one of my favorite Gizz album, it's not like the band is kind of going in a different direction and seeing it blow up in their face or anything like that, it just kind of seems like they're returning to stuff that's worked for them in the past and we're getting varying degrees of success here and there. See it in a way as maybe a large, fun, retrospective before we move on to another idea, another concept, another thing.

STRONG 6
