This is the sophomore commercial record from Kentucky rapper Mr. Jack Harlow. And this feels weird, does this not feel weird right now, like this whole album cycle, all the hype that Jack Harlow has been getting up to this point, we have kind of been building up to this record as if it would be our first introduction to Jack, like this project would be some kind of massive revelation as to who he is as an artist, as if he'd reveal something to us that we haven't heard before. But the truth is, we already know who Jack Harlow is artistically speaking, we've heard “Whats Poppin”, he's already had a full-length debut two years ago. And it's not as if the guy is a total industry plant or anything, because he has a whole mountain of singles and mixtapes that came out before that debut record, if you really want to get a sense of like what brought him to this point artistically. And while it's always a surprise when someone makes it, there's nothing really all that surprising about why Jack Harlow is so appealing. He makes cute smooth little college campus bops with some clever one-liners and a mildly charming delivery. He also has this kind of disengaged, unshaken demeanor about himself that we often confuse with coolness. It's kind of funny how the more disinterested someone seems the more their intrigue increases among the public, because “ooh, they must be so smart”. And Jack is actually smart to his credit, he may look like a scruffy Abercrombie & Fitch model. But he's also proven himself to be self-aware enough to really navigate his sudden trajectory into fame flawlessly, keeping the controversy low and the charisma high, which is maybe why this new record here feels like a second introduction to Jack Harlow in a way. Because I think most people assumed when he first broke, his fame, his time in the industry would be somewhat short-lived. And maybe not transcend outside of that audience of lyrical lemonade fans and white kids who were vibing with him. But now, he's risen to a level of prominence, where he has widespread music industry support, he is nailing down fantastic features with some of the most legendary and popular artists of his day, it's kind of mind-blowing how far he's come at this point. But while, there's never been more praise for Jack up till now, there's also never been more hate too. Me personally, I didn't really liked his debut record, I pretty much wrote off a lot of his early tapes as super derivative Drake drivel. Which it was, but I think Jack has grown more into his own voice since. And I've mostly grown past any kind of partial disdain that I've had for the guy in the way he operates and I've sort of moved into more of a Jack Harlow neutrality I suppose, where I mostly feel like he's fine, he's not hurting anybody, he's not stealing anyone's spot certainly, he makes very polite pop rap that is cool when it's on, but there's nothing so amazing or even offensive about it that is gonna linger with you when it's off. Except when he's talking about how sweet his semen is.

Look, I went into this Jack Harlow record with a positive mindset and not high hopes, but hopes that this thing would at least be enjoyable and engaging from front to back. Because here's the thing, Jack Harlow is great for reverse, he is good for a single, at least some of the time, because I do think “First Class” is one of his most boring songs ever. But still, I think Jack Harlow has proven that he is amazing in small doses, which is great for a generation of music fans where streaming and playlisting has made it easy to be a casual fan of everything. I've heard Jack Harlow's verses and flows at their lowest and their highest, and going into this LP I didn't really get the sense that he'd be over extending himself too much here. He's playing it as calmly as he ever has in fact, maybe a bit more so than before, because I think he's learned at this point that functions for him in terms of getting an audience. The point I'm essentially trying to make here is that I'm yet to get the sense that Jack Harlow is much of an album artist. And if “Come Home The Kids Miss You” exposes anything it's that he is still not really quite there. Because across this entire record, he still comes through in a very one-dimensional, one-note kind of way, his monotone flows get very old very fast. The ultra dry, light and inoffensive production isn't doing much to carry things either, really makes you kind of appreciate the few moments on this thing where you do get a little bit of that Pharrell flavor.

Not only that, but most of this LP is so lacking in lyrical and instrumental detail, it's kind of mind-blowing to see that there are moments here that have more than 10 writer credits on them, like I'm sure there's an explanation as to why, but what is the reason. There are people who could have produced and written the song “Dua Lipa” on here by themselves in their mom's basement, and that's actually one of my favorite tracks here. Which yeah, there are a few bops on this record that I do enjoy. Which again, “Dua Lipa” sounds like a kind of moody nocturnal Drake style banger, but Jack has his own voice and slight spin on it, there are grooves and some one-liners here that are worth replaying.

“Nail Tech” is that horn heavy lead single that we've been listening to and digesting for a while now. The more I hear it, the more I feel like this is Jack's own little “Industry Baby”, where lyrically he's very much speaking on his success and plugging even more deeply into his unplugged attitude. “State Fair”, the closing track, I thought was pretty nice as well, the keys here are great and it's kind of like a dreamy little diary entry where Jack is updating us on how his life is going since the fame.

But a lot of the rest of this record feels like it's scratching many of the same itches, but to a lesser degree. Or frankly there are just cuts here that get kind of stale, because Jack's very one-dimensional delivery and writing style just doesn't really hold up to long lengths of time. Plus, on top of it, there are tracks here that completely lack structure, choruses, Jack's not exactly so charismatic and fiery and passionate that he can go like an entire huge dense freestyle type verse and kind of keep me on the edge of my seat the entire time, which is exactly what makes tracks like “Young Harleezy”, as well as “Churchill Downs” with Drake so boring. And sure, Jack does come out of the gate on that one with that metaverse line, that's pretty clever, but outside of that we're just kind of getting this very flatly delivered endless string of passionless one-liners that just gets really old really fast, Drake isn't really doing anything else other than just kind of echoing that same energy and dragging the song out unnecessarily, at a few points dropping these bars that are very much in reference to Pusha T, kind of vengeful in tone, but he's not really gonna do anything, it's just barking, it's just bullshit. This one line, where Jack goes on about:

“All that time in the kitchen finally panned out”,

which is cute, the pan.

“I put some flavor in a pot and took the bland out”,

but no, this is bland, this is the definition of bland, this is ramen without the flavor packet. But yeah, a Drake feature on a track like this, for an artist like Jack Harlow should be fireworks, should be an event, should be a reason to be excited, but on this LP it's really not.

Also, on top of it, the Lil Wayne feature on the song “Poison” is one of his worst that he's had this year, worse than the moment that he had on “Dawn FM”. Like, eating so much shrimp you get iodine poisoning? Ugh, like fucking awful bar, one of a few in his verse here. And on top of it, his auto-tune and vocal runs don't fit in with the instrumental, it sounds like a total mess.

Justin timberlake is a total non-factor on the back end of “Parent Trap”, a song that's so boring, it's not even really worth sticking around to hear what the rest of it sounds like once you're halfway through. And Snoop Dogg's appearance on “Young Harleezy” is so phoned in, it's not even worth really calling a feature. It makes me wonder, are people genuinely excited for and supporting Jack or are we all just showing up at this moment? Because it's the thing to do. Like, we got an invite to the party and we don't want to be rude. And are the producers even showing up on this thing to take on the song “Parent Trap”? You are telling me heart and soul and focused effort went into the way this beat sounds? This tiny ass beat you'd have to have playing out of a stacked PA on your roof, crank to 11 for it to wake up the neighbors. I mean, the key loop is fine, but that's about it.

So, while there's nothing to stand out or special about much of the material on this LP, it's also hard to be mad at Jack too, because this thing is so freaking inoffensive. There are some kind of ill-conceived song ideas here and there that don't go over too well too. Like the very muddy acoustic guitar loops on the song “Side Piece”, or the very weak reggae flip on “I Got a Shot”. But again, nothing so bad, it's preposterous, and no matter what it is, a highlight or a low light what we're hearing is so bland, it could easily melt into the background and be played in such a way, where you don't even really need to listen to it attentively.

But yeah, that's kind of this record as a whole, it may not on the surface seem as substanceless as an auto-tune and reverb slathered mumble rap record. But really truly it is though, it is as substanceless as anything that might be derided in that way. Because ultimately the tracklist here brings more fleeting vibes than memorable songs. The production is very one note too, and while I'm sure for Jack there is a lot of personal emotional investment in his own success, he doesn't really have too much to speak on outside of that topic and maybe some crushes on some girls here and there. And not that those can't be worthwhile topics for songs, they certainly can, but Jack's statements on these things never really amount into too much of a memorable or a grand statement. Or even a memorable song, as Jack seems pretty averse to structure and hooks throughout much of this project too.

So yeah, overall, listening to this album kind of felt like staring into a void, a sweet cute charming void. But still, a kind of a void. And do I hate him for it, do I think he's the worst, do I think he's trash, do I think he's garbage, do I think he's a cancer on the body of hip-hop? No, I don't think any of that. I think that he's just not really delivering in a way that I expect someone to when they're at this level of success and relevancy. And I think Jack Harlow could honestly be trying harder, he could be trying a lot harder to actually make songs that are a lot more memorable and catchy, maybe bring a bit more energy and versatility to the table. I know the value of him sounding as cool and as laid back as he does on a song like “Nail Tech”, but that doesn't need to be your only gear. So yeah, again, I think if this record shows anything, it's that Jack doesn't really have too much artistically speaking long game right now. You know, again, good in short bursts, but when we hear him try to really go the distance, all he ends up doing is showing us just how little he has to say.

LIGHT 3
