Legendary New York hip hop duo Black Star is back — Yasiin Bey, fka Mos Def, as well as Talib Kweli. A quarter century ago these two guys together as Black Star made one of the best hip-hop records of the 90s. An album that I have been dying to hear follow-up to, since I was in college. But as the years drew on, I kind of gave up on any idea that would happen, with Bey kind of fading further and further out of the limelight and Talib's solo catalog kind of growing more and more lukewarm over the years. Also, consider much of his focus these days seems to be on his very successful and very good podcast. The platform he exclusively releases that podcast through is where this album exclusively sits. But regardless miraculously it's here, the album is here, the follow-up, the sophomore record is here.

And it is kind of a nightmare. Yeah, this record is basically everything that I would be afraid it would be, not only because of its rollout that naturally limited the number of people who were going to hear this thing, almost to a group of people that of course were going to be super fans and most likely happy with whatever the quality of this thing was going to be. But I was also afraid this project would fall into the predictable stereotype of the a very long coming comeback album, where things come across kind of rusty, like everyone's a little out of it, because it's taken over two decades for us to get a new project. And sometimes records like these can feel like either everyone's not exactly at their best or like a little bit of an effortless cash grab. But I will say though it's not like the quality level of this record is so low that it is completely worthless. Bey's and Talib's respective talents still very much shine on this project to some degree. As creatively in hip-hop these guys are veterans who have been at it for a long time and have each hit very high points of greatness across their careers. Their knack for flows and lyricism don't just disappear overnight or even a matter of decades.

So, of course, as a result of that, I would say there are some basic expectations here in terms of performance that are met, but it still doesn't change the fact that this project does come across very rushed. Like, the production by Madlib on this thing for example are all kind of cute and low-fi and left field, but many of them do come across very one-dimensional and repetitive. They're also mixed in a way where they don't really have all that much presence and feel very thin and Bey's and Talib's vocals kind of overtake them in a very aggressive way, even though they're not really rapping all that hard.

There's also little to no chemistry on this project between these two either, and that's what made the original Black Star record so great. Like, the trades, the refrains and routines around the choruses that they would join in together. The really well thought out song and lyrical concepts that they would each drill into so deeply as if it was like a challenge to each other's greatness at the time. Yeah, unfortunately, that's just not so much here on this project.

And not that I'm expecting exactly the same Black Star album in style 20 years later, I'm not. And what I think going in sort of an abstract and kind of theatrical MF Doom inspired way, at least on some of the tracks here is very much fitting for 2022, I think if these two tried to make a record that sounded exactly like their first, it would come across kind of dated, especially since there are so many tracks and moments from that record that feel like they are in tribute or are a celebration of so many ideas within hip-hop from the 80s and early 90s, like The Slick Rick tribute track.

But yeah, Black Star at the time being in a way like an update or a celebration of these really classic hip-hop tropes was part of what made it so special as a project, it seemed like Mos Def at the time and Talib were kind of bonding over that creatively and it really kind of was the glue that made that project so special. And that is what's kind of lacking here, there isn't really too much of any creative cohesion, even on some of the tracks that do come across somewhat conceptual. What we get instead is what's described as an album that is recorded Guerrilla style in dressing rooms and hotels. And yeah, that's kind of what this thing sounds like, it sounds very casual, it sounds very thrown together. Not that there aren't great albums that have been made under those conditions, there certainly are. Especially since these days, you don't really need like a huge big studio to make a fantastic record.

But instead of taking advantage of that power to do things on your own terms creatively, it just kind of seems like Bey and Talib use it as an excuse to hand in something that is just very low grade and very underneath their respective talents, because there are so many songs here that are short of breath and so casual in tone and performance and just come across kind of rift. From Bey's very weak and awfully sung vocal passages on the opening track, which really could have used another take. Two, then also Talib's lyrical miracle bars that are a little flashy in terms of rhyme scheme, but don't really amount to saying all that much in the grander scheme of things. And without there being some great creative focus between these two kind of driving them in a certain direction on these tracks, a lot of what they are saying on these songs doesn't really amount to much more than mildly witty food for thought. But still, we do get some topical cuts here and there that are worthy of note. Whether that be “Sweetheart. Sweethard. Sweetodd.”, which is trying to play a bit of a romantic angle here, though I will say it comes across awkward much of the time, especially with Bey sounding half asleep on the back end of the track, and lyrically sort of trailing off as he sometimes does when he is allowed to be the finisher on some of these songs.

There is the song “Supreme Alchemy”, which has no Bey verse in sight for some reason, but Talib here does deliver a series of very quick bars that are in tribute to a lot of different artists, sort of current day or in the past, who have inspired him or he just kind of has a lot of admiration for. But still, even with this track having the focus that it does in a way, it doesn't really dig all that deep. And there are other cuts here that come across just as half baked. Whether that be “My Favorite Band”, which Bey comments on the front end of the track of “yeah, the vibe of the whole thing sounding so raw”, and it certainly does, it sounds so raw, to the point where it's completely unprepared and kind of a mess. There's also the very short of breath “Yonders”, which just does not bring all that much development to the table.

Really, the only moments that stuck out to me as highlights on this pretty short record, short in comparison to the debut at least, was the first half of “So Be It”. Which has a grimy beat, great pacing and Bey's relentless flows in the kickoff. Yeah, this all coming together is pretty much the most thrilling thing you're gonna hear in the first half of this project. And again, I emphasize first half as there is a point where Talib is saying:

“Flash catastrophe, add an apostrophe, your whole philosophy is mediocrity
Atrocities committed in the name of owning property, monopolies
That's my hypotheses”.
The only other moments on this thing I loved were “The Main Thing Is to Keep the Main Thing the Main Thing”, which features some kind of eerie Twilight Zone raps, set against a spacious beat, vocally these two bring a higher level of chemistry than they've had on pretty much any song prior. And then, there's the final two tracks. First being “Frequency” with Black Thought and obviously with him kicking the song off is a nice start and it kind of seems like Bey and Talib don't want to get caught snoozing on a song that Black Thought is on. So lyrically, they're like almost on their best behavior, the song goes the distance at seven minutes, so I will say the ending completely trails off. The idyllic and jazzy grooves coming off the instrumental are great and everyone on the track does a great job of finding balance between sounding calm and relaxed, but also expressive. I would say Talib's verse specifically has this great kind of almost logical flow to it, it doesn't seem like just a bunch of non-sequiturs disconnected from each other. There's also the title track, which I think has one of the best instrumentals here and comes across way warmer and way sweeter than almost any other beat here, especially with these swelling string sections during the chorus passage, which are beautiful. Also Talib's social commentary in the first leg of the track shows he still has it in terms of like bringing perception to a song. And the spoken word outro of the track kind of serves as a tribute to the magical origins of hip-hop itself and it's a nice moment, it's a cool vibe and sound to end on. But unfortunately, this sentiment, I didn't really feel it within much of this project itself. Which again, is sad, because tributing those old ideas, those classic ideas and tropes from the golden age of rap is kind of what made Black Star originally so cool to begin with, like embodying those ideas and kind of updating them and bringing them to a new audience, into a new era of the late 90s and just kind of making them not sound stale anymore, making them sound fresh, making them sound slick, making them sound cool. That mission seems to be pretty much completely over for Black Star at this point, I would say just about anything that you could say would be creatively a mission is over for them at this point, with this project that again sounds very thrown together and very rushed and not like the worst thing in the world, but certainly on the surface appears to be low effort, considering the creative highs that we've heard both of these guys at previously, especially together in this duo.

LIGHT 5
