This is a brand new LP from singer, songwriter, multi-instrumentalist, producer, one half of the fantastic Black Dresses, miss Ada Rook, whose work we've covered on the channel multiple times at this point. Black Dresses in my opinion even came out with one of the better records of this year so far. Black Dresses' output over the last several years has been so attention grabbing, it's almost easy to forget that Rook has her own solo discography that she's been slowly building up for years at this point. With records that range from art pop to industrial to video game soundtracks. Her own album sometimes being even more boundary-less than the already wide array of sounds that Black Dresses cover. Her last proper full-length album was dropped a few years ago with the release of “2,020 Knives”, which was a hulking hour-long album that was a a bit difficult to wade through.

However, it seems like distillation and focus is the name of the game on “Ugly Death No Redemption…”. The sounds of electro and industrial and ultra aggressive dance music are nothing entirely new for Ada here, but she really drills down into these sounds for a very hellish and cohesive 35 minute listen, with crushing distortions, searing screams, pummeling kick drums, all fed into some truly twisted fusions of noise rock, industrial metal, EBM, EDM.

The intro track on the record “im cis”, pretty much states the modus operandi for the album, where Ada talks about things she exposed of herself in her art, being weaponized against her, being tired of the “2,020 Knives”, just wanting to feel nice, being done going over a traumatic past and just wanting to have a good time instead. From here, the record busts into “999999999 IN A DREAM”, which does sound like a filthy and harrowing goth dance party from a few decades ago, with pumping beats, icy synths and shocking levels of distortion and screams. But there's also something kind of epic and dystopian about the track, especially in the synth work that reminds me of like “The Blade Runner” soundtrack [RIP Vangelis]. But this track is totally devoid of any shred of hope, pretty much depicting the death of humanity in a dystopian way that is touched down on here and there throughout the rest of the LP.

With the track “PURGATOR3Y MODULATION ENGINE”, Ada Rook rages and aches over what haunts her, moving through these dreamy piano-backed verses, then eventually wake up to a harsh reality on the choruses of this track, of banging beats and synth horns that kind of sound like a trap EDM fusion with industrial metal riffs. There's a serious sense of dread to this track of waking up and pushing past the ugliness in your life in the world.

Then, we have the track “TRU U”, which might be drowned in the most low-fi distortion of any track here, features one of the most sinister choruses on the LP too. Because lyrically on this track, Ada comes across as being so overwhelmed with rage and shame, that she may not even know who the real her is. And between the sequence beats, screams, cleans and synths, Ada continues to deliver to the audience this very animated play on industrial metal. The goth club bangers though come back on the song “GRAVITY WEAPON”, which is maybe the closest to this LP comes to dishing out a hit, as the pumping beats and riffs on this one are exhilarating.

There are some midpoint tracks on the LP that I'm on the fence with. Like, on the very chaotic “COWARD 2 COWARD”, there are some heavy beats and rapid fire laser synths on this track, the performance is intense, but this one lacks any musical ideas, like many other tracks here have, that kind of stick with me after listening to it. Even with a sparkling chorus laced with these childlike lead vocals. Plus, the melodic vocal lines carried by Ash Nerve on the song “UNDERNEATH IT ALL” leave a bit to be desired too. In terms of timbre tone and volume, they come across quite weak, which is the last thing you want in the midst of all this production from Ada that is so bold, so loud, so in your face.

Thankfully, Ada takes the reins back vocally on “VANISH/DOOM” and dishes out some stronger chord progressions as well that have almost a spooky romantic black metal quality to them, making that work really nicely in the context of these heavy, punchy, industrial beats. And noisy chaotic glitches too, which is just a testament to her ferocity and finesse as a producer. We also have the manic and explosive “XANAFALGUE”, whose rifts and grooves are almost akin to that of a new metal or a metal core song, like the screamed, somewhat rapped rhymes and breakdowns, like you can't tell me this isn't every bit as nasty as like a Slipknot track, but there's like a more noisy intense and almost like bedroom type feel to the production. And to boot, there's some wild and jittery dance passages that contrast from these riffs too. Meanwhile, the lyrics on this track come across like a very unsettling commentary on self-delusion or doubt.

Following here, we have “night in a secret world”, which is a very low key transitional cut that segues into the following track. It not only brings a moment of peace instrumentally to the record, but also a narrative shift, with Ada's singing about shedding her anxieties, her agony, her obsessions, but also these remnants of light and goodness too. Maybe jettisoning all of these intense emotions going in either direction in order to reach some kind of like numbness or purgatory, just a place where everything kind of shuts off and can be relaxed. And the closing track “5H4D0W H34R7Z”, just like the intro cut to this record and the second track as well, brings this energy, this idea of a release, letting go of inhibitions.

So, in that sense, there is something about this LP that does feel a bit full circle. A lot like the latest Black Dresses record, I wouldn't say this LP has a super clear linear narrative going on in it, but it does focus on a particular type of feeling and point of view and it doesn't move off of it or it doesn't finish until it's like done with that feeling, it's done kind of processing it. And again, that focus not only comes through in the lyrics, but the tone of the music as well. Now, with that being said, were there a few cuts here who musically and instrumentally I wasn't crazy about or after I listened to the entire LP did the whole thing feel a little one-dimensional? Yes, but still this project did hit hard, I do see a lot of creative parallels between this and the latest Black Dresses record, which I did like. And this thing probably has some of the best industrial and electro industrial you're going to hear this year, so I definitely recommend that you should check it out.

STRONG 7
