This is the sixth full-length LP from singer and songwriter Angel Olsen, who built herself up as one of the most valued voices on the indie songwriter circuit through the 2010s. One of the more versatile too, whether you're talking about the passionate and stripped back folkisms of her debut record “Half Way Home” or the indian garage rock aesthetics that she brought to the table for “Burn Your Fire For No Witness”. There of course was the impeccably sharp songwriting on my personal favorite “MY WOMAN”. Then, there were the grand and dreamy synthesizers of Angel Olsen's art pop switch up “All Mirrors”. Just a year later though we got the very stripped back “Whole New Mess”, which was very clearly seeking after a simpler sound and simpler approach to deliver the same songs from “All Mirrors”. But honestly, is as excited about that as I was, because “All Mirrors” is not really my favorite Angel Olsen record, whatever magic could have been pulled out of those songs was clearly coming out of that album and not so much these skeletal versions.

But now, with “Big Time” we truly do have a new chapter, a new album cycle from Angel. Which is essentially this big, sad, soft sentimental nostalgic country album, loaded with tunes about loss, heartache and breaking up. The performances on this thing are consistently gentle, slow, which does sort of make the overall pacing of this record an issue, especially as we are traveling through tracks like “Dream Thing” and “Ghost On”. As well as “All the Flowers”, which features one of the more understated vocal performances on the LP, which I wish did pick up a little bit with the gorgeous strings that intensify toward the end of the song. But by that same token, when Angel and her band hit us with a big finish or a big chorus transitioning from these softer spots, it really is gratifying. Whether that be the song “Right Now”, which finishes with these pounding drums and huge growling descending guitar leads that remind me of like the finish of David Bowie's “Rock n Roll Suicide”. Also, the frightened and pained vocals that pop in on the chorus of “Go Home”, whose instrumentation also builds up higher and higher toward the finish with strings, deafening reverb, some horn hits here and there too. The whole track just feels like being swallowed up by fear.

The production on this thing is consistently clean, but textured, also well balanced. Puts a heavy emphasis on Angel's vocals and lyrics. The country twang on this thing instrumentally is also very light on the ears for it being such a country indebted record. Even the title track here with its weepy slide melodies and honky tonk pianos doesn't really lose its atmospheric indie appeal due to the production aesthetics. But still, it is cool to hear Angel embracing this country sound and style a bit more, because it is something that complements her voice so well when she would kind of give this genre a nod here and there in the past.

And the lyrics in my opinion on this LP are really hitting this time around too. Whether she is talking about being left confused on the opener “All The Good Times”, where she describes needing to exit a relationship that's clearly not working out, but struggling to figure out just as to why that was. Also, going into feeling like she's stuck at a point of futility:

“I can't say that I'm sorry
When I don't feel so wrong anymore
I can't tell you I'm tryin'
When there's nothin' left here to try for”.

The song “Dream Thing” lyrically also toys with the boundaries between fantasy and reality with it narratively starting off in a dream. About a fight that lasts 25 years, but then she runs into this person, seeing them in a new suit, seeing them in a new self, wanting to reconnect in that moment, but it doesn't really quite happen. Then, “Through the Fires” provides a really interesting and kind of touching narrative shift on the record. The track also sounds like it's underscored by a 1950s piece of old Hollywood soundstage jazz, but with a very very very soft demeanor. Angel's performance here vocally is very subtle, is very low key, but the melodies ring through beautifully and the poetry is killer:

“I lost sight, then I made up my mind
To learn to release the dreams that had died
In spite of the sound of what I'd heard
To recognize truth without any word
I felt the change and it came back around
Then I moved into the feeling I found
And the feeling I found showed me how I could lose
To love without boundary and put it to use”.

Also, these mentions of walking through the fires, of earthly desire, letting go of a pain that prevents you from moving up higher, there's really kind of a grand sense of change and metamorphosis on this track. The closing track “Chasing The Sun”'s instrumental also pulls from a similarly nostalgic era, with a few Lana Del Rey-esque moments in the mix as well when Angel digs into her lower register and the strings kind of start soaring in the background.

But I will say, there is kind of a lack of variety across the LP that I was referring to earlier, not just in terms of like the speed of it and the emotion of this record, but the tonality, sometimes the instrumentals too. Like, for example, the song “This Is How It Works”, which pulls from the same tier in your beer country jukebox as the opener, the chords even sound eerily similar. But somehow the track brings a weaker chorus to the table.

So, this LP overall, while I did enjoy it, the whole thing does come across very very very cut and dry in terms of the presentation of the instrumentation, what the instrumentation is, what it's doing, Angel's vocal performances and what she's saying. The emotional characteristics of this record, the aesthetics of this record, the topical focus of the songs. But it's still a powerful thing that Angel is able to communicate these things, translate them on this record, while also making it just sound deceptively simple. Like, are there some moments here where in terms of passion or volume I wanted a bit more? Yes. And sure, you could say with this LP, Angel is sitting much more comfortably in her wheelhouse, she's not exactly like venturing out into the unknown as she did on “All Mirrors”. But the tunes, the lyrics, the song ideas are all still there, what this record doesn't have in punch it kind of makes up for an emotional intensity. As this is very much a lie in bed all day and kind of sulk the pain away type of album, especially with the closing mantras of the record being about doing nothing and driving the blues away.

LIGHT 7
