This is a new mixtape from an up-and-coming West Coast rapper, who has been making quite a few moves as of late. He had a recent EP drop with Gesaffelstein, which was pretty sick, he's worked with Fivio Foreign, Kanye West. There's also an 070 Shake placement on this project here too. And yeah, this new tape is kind of on the short side, nine tracks, 27 minutes or so runtime, so going into it I was kind of hoping for a very tight succinct picture of what at this point exactly makes KayCyy tick artistically.

And sadly, as I listened to this thing it fell short of even that very low expectation. And don't get me wrong, some of the tracks on this thing are more than listenable, but not really due to a sound or a vibe that KayCyy has painstakingly engineered on his own, because much of this project is shockingly derivative, even with it being as short as it is. Also, kind of surprising this is the case with this guy dropping singles and tapes for over five years now. But yeah, all “Get Used to It” seems to do is inch KayCyy's sound and style even closer to that of Playboi Carti's. And the rest of the shallow pool of influences that he's pulling from here. I mean, the song “Replay” for example sounds as hype, as grimy, as repetitive, as anything off “Whole Lotta Red”. KayCyy even nails down some of those little nasally vocal inflections and ad-libs. The only thing I could say that sets this song apart from anything off of “Whole Lotta Red” is that it's a bit more atmospheric and maybe a tad bit industrial, because it's not as if KayCyy's vocal performance here or pen game is so standout or shocking that it sticks with me.

So yeah, in some ways, this type of hype and and rage ready trap serves as a creative baseline for what KayCyy is doing on this project on a handful of tracks. But the best moments here in my opinion are when he's able to transcend that in some way and elevate it, make it a little artsier. Like, on the opening track “Look What I Found”, which has a very melodic and very dramatic intro, sounds like something that could have kicked off “Donda” for example. And it eventually breaks into this very urgent, string-backed, auto-tuned piece of trap, really nasty, really in your face. I'm also super impressed with the song “Howwww”, which is kind of a melodic rant on KayCyy's part over a lengthy bed of sparkling synthesizers and what sounds like really creatively processed and pitched vocal chops. The song “Hold You Up” isn't my favorite track on this project, but at least its groovy beats and chill chords, as well as respectable vocal performance show that KayCyy is just as comfortable in more of an alternative R&B or neo-soul lane. The song “Rain” haunts a somewhat similar space as well with the 070 Shake on the feature, but now as far as this R&B flavor goes we are getting instrumentally something a lot darker, smokier, more abstract with strange effects and vocal harmonies swirling in every direction.

Really the roughest part of this little tape here is the last leg, where the song “Borrow” is stylistically and vocally pulls from very much the same pool that “Replay” did. But now, we have even more basic elements working for us instrumentally and vocally. And somehow on the lyrical side here KayCyy seems convinced that other people are like borrowing his ideas and his style, even though the song in my opinion has really no originality to its style at all, it just kind of sounds like a subpar Carti track.

Really, I'm looking for something memorable to stick with me on the end of this record, and unfortunately the song “New Rules” isn't bringing it either. This track mostly feels like KayCyy vocally and lyrically riffing over a somber trap beat that I think Future would have done something stickier with for example. And then, we have the closing track which is one of the most underwritten tracks here, in some respects it is very much like the song “Howwww” in terms of it feeling like a motif, a meditation, it's auto-tuned, it's melodic, I like the instrumental for the most part, it's really watery and surreal. But again, even if this track does share some commonalities with the song how, it doesn't reach as high peaks emotionally or instrumentally.

And yeah that's kind of this short little project over here. I was hoping for something a bit punchier, a bit more defined, something that I could kind of take away from this project in terms of this is KayCyy sound, this is KayCyy style, this is KayCyy's lyrical ability, this is KayCyy's ability to write a song, and I didn't really get much of any of that — bars weren't really all that memorable, but that could easily be replaced with a super hype or engaging or memorable performance vocally or like some energy, some intensity and generally this tape was kind of low on that, outside of a few points. So, energy wasn't really as there as it could have been much of the time. And on top of it, there's not really a whole lot of songwriting or structure being packed into these tracks either, it's rare that KayCyy comes through with a hook or something that really kind of sticks in your head after the fact. Generally, the production choices are impressive, but that's kind of just a case of the beats carrying really. And it is good that KayCyy proves himself to be at least somewhat versatile with a few different flavors of trap style, hip-hop and R&B. But again, nothing he's really putting his own spin on. There are a couple tracks on this thing are quite good, a couple that show potential, but the rest of the project really is sort of a dead zone, and KayCyy has yet to kind of really and truly dig himself out of the crowd of artists who are out here doing a somewhat similar thing right now.

DECENT 4
