This is the debut full-length LP of Ethel Kane, the pseudonym of Southern singer-songwriter Hayden Silas Anhedönia. Someone whose story and aesthetic I've been pulled into recently with the release of this album and the flood of suggestions I received to check it out. She's a former Southern baptist who uses this alter ego of hers to explore the plight on this album of a teenage girl, being smothered in all directions by her traditional christian upbringing, toxic family life, drinking, isolation, as well as an abusive romance that ends tragically on the closing track with Ethel depicting herself being consumed. And given those angles, as well as the cover here, looking like the last known photo of a missing person, I kind of expected something a little darker coming from this album, at least sonically. Not that it never happens “Ptolemaea” for example is one of the most chilling and blood-curdling tracks I've heard this year. And the following interlude “August Underground”'s heavy droning guitars and ethereal atmosphere feels like something lifted out of Chelsea Wolf track.

But still, I had to revisit this album several times to break the expectation that pretty much every track I was hearing here was going to be as dark as that or darker. Because the story and lyrical narratives on this LP are pretty focused and solid throughout, easily the most gripping aspect of the album. Yeah, there are some obvious cliches flying about here and there, like “it's you and me against the world” and “it's just not my year”. But there's still a strong sense on all of these tracks, of our protagonists being caught between a dystopian american dream and frankly a really dangerous relationship. And Ethel seems powerless to stop both of them.

What I'm not really crazy about on this album frankly is everything on the musical side. For sure, there are some interesting influence and genre fusions going on, we have singer-songwriter music, dream pop, slow core, coming together with an ethereal and somewhat gothic twist, occasionally getting a touch of country or americana. There are also a lot of tracks here whose vocal performance and pacing seems very much inspired by Lana Del Rey. Which again is interesting, I can't list to you a dozen albums that are mixing the same kinds of sounds and influences. But I think Ethel leans into these ideas in such a way where we get kind of a bland result. The vocals for one are not the strongest or most distinct you're gonna hear. Ethel is a competent singer for sure and she is a motive enough to translate the dejection and despair that she is trying to get across on a lot of these tracks. But personally, I would struggle to pick her out of a lineup if I had to. Then, slow paced songwriting is one thing, but starving the listener of any significant progression to the point where it makes tracks like “A House in Nebraska” just tedious to listen to, is just too much. In fact, all the songs and interludes on this project are quite a bit above average in terms of runtime and it's only on occasion where Ethel really justifies those six and seven minute length tracks. And while, reverb is cool and it's applied pretty effectively during some points of this record, a lot of the time it is overused to the point where you're stripping out any texture from the vocals, the instrumentation. “American Teenager” for example sounds like a boneless version of The Cranberries song “Dreams”. The bass drums and vocals in the second half of “Hard Times” even get quite a bit mushy.

Now, I think the LP sonically does gain a bit more body in the second half with the song “Thoroughfare” to kick things off, we go in more of an acoustic direction with everything slowly being engulfed in effects and these soaring guitar leads, I even think the little raw jam toward the end of the track is a nice touch, the heavy droning guitars, massive beats and surreal vocal manipulations on the track “Gibson Girl” are pretty hypnotic too. And the song “Ptolemaea” that I mentioned earlier is downright frightening, with all of its ghostly vocal samples and what sounds like a swarm of flies buzzing endlessly on the intro. We do hit a bit of a speed bump toward the end with two lyric-less interludes that drag on a bit too long, and they also sit back to back in the tracklist. “Sun Bleached Flies” suffers from sonically a lot of the same issues that many tracks in the first leg of the record do, which is a shame because the big burst of instrumentation toward the end of the track is quite good, but still the pianos and drums that serve as the backbone of this track are a little stiff, a little awkward, it's a shaky foundation for such a huge song to be sitting on. Sort of the same story with the closing track too, the singing is fine, the story is good, it's an immense finish for this record narratively. But yeah, the whole first section of the song is really bland, really flavorless sonically, but it comes to a huge and pretty gratifying finish.

Yeah, with this Ethel Kane album I'm pretty split. There are some cool blueprint, abstract, macro picture ideas coming together to make this record intriguing on the surface. But digging deeper into it, the production could use a bit of seasoning, as could some of the instrumentation and compositions. And I hope Ethel is able to flex a bit more vocally on the next record as well.

LIGHT 6
