This is a brand new LP from songwriter Mike Hadreas, Perfume Genius, a musical project he's been masterminding through the 2010s, bringing it from humble lo-fi piano ballads to some of the most immaculately produced art pop of the past decade. We have gotten some incredible records from Mike over the years with “Put Your Back n 2 It”, as well as “No Shape” being some of my personal favorites. And he ended the 2010s on a pretty ambitious note, splitting time and effort between yet another very solid batch of tracks with “Set My Heart on Fire Immediately”. And a 2019 experimental dance production titled “The Sun Still Burns Here” here that had an entirely original soundtrack attached to it. Now, there was news that the music from this production would eventually see wide release, but I wasn't sure when. And now, here comes 2022's “Ugly Season” and it would seem yeah, this is like pretty much the music from that production.

Now, I imagine these pieces for an album as opposed to a stage show — did it have to undergo quite a bit of editing or sculpting? But it's still pretty clear Mike is coming from a completely different place on this LP artistically as it sounds wholly unlike anything Perfume Genius has released thus far. As no matter how experimental Mike's music has gotten over the years, pop appeal has always stayed at arm's length. But with “Ugly Season”, it's completely out of the window, especially on tracks that sound like they were meant to soundtrack an experimental ballet or a psychedelic dance odyssey. So yeah, while this project may not be one of Mike's catchiest, I do think there is a solid trade-off going on here, because the sound play, textures and production on this thing are generally amazing. The arrangements, the dense displays of instrumentation are really impressive. The intense performances, thoughtful compositions and linear progressions make numerous songs on this thing an edge of your seat experience. Like, the song “Herem”, which is an elegant, but dense piece of Bjork-esque art pop, eventually morphing into this beautiful avant-opera piece, with droning cords and breathy, but beautiful lead vocals that are slipping in and out of frame. Then, some underwater electronics to finish things off on the outro.

There's “Eye in the Wall”, which is a groovy and entrancing dance jam that lasts nine minutes and is totally surreal and trippy frankly. The whole thing starts off like it's set in the desert and ends in a place that sounds like it's in a far-off galaxy. The song “Hellbent” introduces more throbbing electronics, as well as lots of very strange and harsh tones and drones, all of which have this slightly industrial quality to them, but Mike's voice cuts through the mayhem like it's nothing, with the performance especially on the drum side getting more and more jammy. To the point where this track becomes this insane noise acid rock dance piece. The chaos displayed here is just incredible.

So yeah all of these tracks are pretty massive, but there are some shorter pieces that add to the record quite a bit too. The track “Pop Song” is not bullshitting as this is easily the catchiest track on the entire LP. There's a more primal appeal to this one, especially with all of the heavy hand drum passages. There are some catchy vocal refrains as well, which are very quiet, very low key, very intimate, but are still hookier than anything on “Ugly Season” up to this point. The grand chorus vocals that seep in toward the end of the track give the song a very warm sense of finality too. With “Teeth”, there's something so soft and fragile about this one, like it's coming out of a little music box, but that music box is gigantic, so I feel like I'm in it, or falling into it with all of these swirling horn harmonies locking into the metallic arpeggios that kick the track off. As the instrumental intensity dies down, I feel like I'm listening to a microscopic opera performance. And “Photograph” sounds like a theatrical combo of something from the Twin Peaks soundtrack, but then also a Danny Elfman piece. It's sinister and dark, but also beautiful,. It may not hit exactly with a traditional structure as the vocals we hear on the front end eventually melt away, making more room for the growing layers of horns and strings, as well as this kind of depressive latin groove. And once it hits a peak, it all kind of slowly vaporizes from there. But this is one of a few tracks on this record that reaches an immense high that eventually drops into a pretty inconclusive end that leaves me cold. The transitional piano bits don't exactly add a lot to the already choppy tracklist flow too.

Now, it's obvious Mike put a lot of effort into making these pieces presentable for an album format. But still in this state, the whole thing does sound like it is meant to be the soundtrack for a visual or performance. And without that extra element there to link all of these tracks and pieces together, there is an element of cohesion to “Ugly Season that kind of feels like it's just missing. Now, this isn't necessarily the most detrimental thing that could happen to this record, because in a standalone context a lot of these pieces sound great on their own. I think the only one I didn't really enjoy at all was the title track, which I'm not really so sure about this sloshy experimental piece of reggae with sort of pitch-down Xiu Xiu-esque vibratos and falsetto harmonies flowing throughout, it all does make me just like wince a bit.

But outside that, pretty much every track here does have mind-expanding displays of instrumentation, musical composition, even if it doesn't come together as tightly as a holistic experience. And even if some of these tracks do tend to trail off a little bit.

DECENT 7
