This is a brand new LP from rapper Lupe Fiasco, his eighth at this point, which follows 2018's conceptual narrative deep dive into racism, slavery and beyond on “Drogas Wave”. So of course, with Lupe Fiasco having the reputation artistically that he does, he's going to come into a new album with an angle, with a concept, with something. And with this LP that hits closer to home, Chicago. Now it's no secret the city has been a hotbed for drill music for the past decade or so, the hyper violent strain of trap that has launched the careers of world famous rappers, such as Chief Keef, Lil Bibby, Fredo Santana, Lil Dirk, G Herbo and countless others. The original scene and hunger for drill music since it popped off is not what it used to be, especially since stylistic offshoots from the UK bounce their way back over to Brooklyn, creating a new generation of rappers that are kind of the new focus of the genre. And now with all the time to digest the progression of this genre and the societal conditions that create it, Lupe Fiasco comes through with an LP that focuses on exactly that from numerous angles, with a series of beats that range from trap to jazz rap packed with hypnotic rhythms and very entrancing sax runs. No matter what style a beat may be going for things on this LP are consistently easy going, smooth, and dreamy, kind of moody as well, which is fitting for the contemplative tone Lupe delivers his verses with.

Because truth be told, this is not a super aggressive or in your face album, which is understandable because from a narrative standpoint, from an emotional standpoint, this record is more like a funeral procession. For the tragic violence and bitterness that has consumed the youth of the city, specifically those involved in the drill scene. But Lupe is not just on this record spending his time pointing fingers at any individual person, he's too smart for that. He delivers a broader picture on many of these tracks, what that angle is depends on the song. Like, on the track “Autoboto”, where he reflects on street violence and getting pulled into the court system as a result of it as something that is kind of a thrilling or for sport. The flow and beat pretty much checks every basic box you would expect from a modern trap track, but that's kind of the point as he is very smartly using the sound, the vibe, the flows, the style to comment on the genre itself. And I'll also add this track is about as close as we get on this LP to just a straightforward banger.

“Precious Things” quickly takes things into a much moodier direction, with dreary pianos and expressive guest vocals from Nayirah on the chorus. Lupe here essentially paints a very detailed picture of the ways in which jealousy, drinking, betrayal, threats and communication breakdowns can create unnecessary violence and tension within a community, within the youth. That's essentially what's portrayed in the first verse, but the second that's where he talks about these people the individuals in the scene being exploited by the music industry, by the media for monetary gain. He also points to an audience of listeners who aren't really paying attention to the content of the music and what societally it means for that to be so many people's reality. He shows these artists are being treated essentially as useless commodities, who the moment they land in prison they just kind of rot away there and they're forgotten:

“It's like you could've done more to try and keep us out them handcuffs
It's like we only matter when fans is putting they hands up”.
And again, outside of throwing money out there, the industry labels they don't really seem interested in helping.

Meanwhile, the song “Kiosk” is a pretty strong statement on materialism, using diamonds essentially as the object of that, which as you wear or cover yourself with them you could become a target of adoration, of interest or violence. Lupe likens the obsession with jewelry on this track to that of a religion, or even an opiate to distract from more significant things, like our world plagued by violence and hatred. So yeah, he's making points, he's saying stuff, he's saying very smart stuff on these tracks and he's doing with great impressive and consistent flows and wordplay.

Moving from here, we have the heart-wrenching “Ms. Mural”, which continues in this Mural series essentially that Lupe has been on with “Mural” on “Tetsuo & Youth” and “24 Mural Jr.” later on “DROGAS WAVE”. But “Ms. Mural” here is quite literal with the opening line saying:

"If you had to paint the gutter, which color would you choose?”,
and pretty much everything within the first section of the song continues under the guise of this kind of paint art based concept. Not only is it fantastic, but it gets even better, especially as Lupe lyrically gets kind of meta about it:

“Professionally accept what ethically I hate
So in all of my work you see this wrestling with faith”.
From there, he kind of drives into a short exchange with a spectator of the art that he is making musically, commenting that the diatribe that he just went on is so smart, is so great, it's such a fantastic breakdown. There's even a really dark ending where a painter that he is portraying destroys instead of creates and it's kind of a harrowing moment on the record.

The pace on this thing picks up with the song “Naomi”, which is a really kind of bouncy, rich piece of jazzy boom bap, it may not be as narratively heavy as many of the other cuts here, that's true. But I see this track as kind of a moment for Lupe to allow himself and the audience to breathe a little bit and just flex his talents as a charismatic and smart MC. And after this song, I think it's pretty safe to say that he's still got it. Even if on some subsequent tracks from here he does come off vocally a little monotone.

And as long as I'm griping, I will address the track “Ghoti” on the front end of the album, which I think the lyrical content on here, the imagery is pretty intense and pretty strong and obviously like the violence there is necessary in order for it to be tied into the greater picture of this record. But as a song, by itself it's a little short, kind of undercooked, I think it's not as thoroughly explored as many of the other tracks here. Then, there's “Seattle”, which I think Lupe is low energy and the somewhat rough vocal take from Nayirah on this one, which I think is the weakest of the three that appear on this LP, do kind of put this one in a bit of a lower standing than many of the other tracks here.

But we even get a solid closer on this LP too “On Faux Nem”, which is great, maybe not for reasons that you would expect from Lupe. For example, the opening verse of this track is just Lupe saying:

“Rappers die too much”,
that's the verse. And then, the rest of those bars play out with no vocals whatsoever, it's just the instrumental. Now in the second verse he talks about why that is, a need for silent reflection for basically all the content of the record so far. And from there he ties up the overall concept of the record in a bow, you have individuals who are voluntarily engaging in this type of music, that's on a very focused, very violent topic. But then on the other side what incentivizes that is an industry that is just also desperate to make so much money off of that, whether it be on the social media side or the streaming side. Lupe then goes on to explore his own personal struggles, talking about how in a way he's a part of the problem too. But I still think the track ends up a potent statement.

And I can't really complain about this record beyond that, like the production is impressive, consistent, Lupe's verses and narratives and word play and wit are on point. The idea and concept behind the record overall is pretty timely too. And one more thing I enjoy about this album is that everything that's so smart and so great about it is just so on the surface, it's like really in your face, it's clear as day. Lupe for as easy going as this album may sound on the surface is just really bold and up front with what he's trying to get across here. And taking that angle, taking that tone can be a bit of a risk if the material that you're bringing, like doesn't smash on impact, doesn't need to be sort of obscure to create an appeal for it and that's certainly not the case here, Lupe is not pulling any punches, he's not hiding the ball in any way. And yet everything that he's saying on this record sticks. And look, some Lupe fans may prefer the density of “Tetsuo & Youth” or the density of |Drogas Wave” and that's fine and that's great, those are really solid records too. But I think there is something about the succinctness of drill music that makes it work so well.

DECENT 8
