This is a brand new LP from singer and songwriter miss Regina Spector, her eighth I believe. Which follows “Remember Us to Life” back in 2016, which hard to believe it's six years old at this point, does not feel like it. But still that LP is one of my favorite records from her so far. Hands down, one of her strongest crops of songs, as there was just something about her lyrically eclectic brand of piano pop and chamber pop that was kind of revitalized on this one. Sure, this album wasn't exactly her “Soviet Kitsch” days, which I remember very fondly, but I think the quirk of that era was handily replaced by a more maturity and a new level of conceptual ambition. Which makes “Home, Before and After” an interesting body of work for long time Regina fans, I'm sure. Not only because she's finally unleashing studio versions of tracks that she has been playing for fans since the 2000s. Like, “Raindrops” and “Loveology”, both of which came out great. The gentle elegant and classically influenced piano arpeggios on “Raindrops” are true to live performances fans have been hearing for a while now, even with the super subtle touches of strings and effects. The song is great but we knew that, it's amazing that Regina can still perform it with this kind of lovesick innocence. Long after a time when I think most people have completely lost touch with such a thing. But then there's “Loveology”, which is added onto massively with these really grand bits of orchestration, which I think enhance the track's uniquely disjointed structure — from “the incurable humanist” lyrical passages to the bits about “going to the movies”, then the last portion that the song earns its title from as a Regina's going through these various fields of study, which aren't really real whether you're talking about porcupineology or loveology or I'm sorry-ology, which is just a display of the absurd, but beautiful approach that Regina has to lyricism. The way she's able to communicate so much emotionally through just ridiculous abstractions sometimes.

So, if you enjoyed the very big budget strings on this track, I have good news for you, because the orchestrations sound even bigger on many of the other songs here. Because this thing is produced to the fucking nines. But I will say, the massive and bold arrangements on this LP do go a little too far occasionally, they do feel overbearing. With a lot of these tracks I feel like we have the Regina Spektor's song at the core of it and then layered on top of that we have all these strings, horns, coming straight out of a movie with a hundred million dollar budget. And yeah, it is more excessive than tasteful I'll say, but if there's a vocalist and lyricist unique enough to helm such a mighty ship I think it is Regina.

Like, on the opener “Becoming All Alone”, where Regina's voice cuts pretty handily through the booming bass and kick drums. The waterfalls of strings and horns coming down from above too. And it's big, it's colorful, though I will admit there is an intimacy that is kind of lacking in approaching things this way, even if the mountainous orchestrations in the second half do kind of hit. From here in the tracklist we move on to groovier pastures. The song “Up the Mountain” begins like a very tense spacious spoken word piece off a Kate Bush album, but then quickly bursts into these very tight horn, bass and drum grooves. And the lyrics are, they kind of repetitive, but Regina's flow snap very nicely to the beat and I think the result here is essentially her most mystical and danceable song ever.

The track “SugarMan” relies on a much more laid-back groove with these mesmerizing repetitions of

“Sugar man, sugar man, sugar man, sugar man
Sugar daddy, sugar daddy, sugar daddy, sugar daddy”,
and in between these lines we get an image of a relationship or a connection where there is a lot of sweetness, a lot of sugar, Regina feels so lost in this, she is no longer her own person. But eventually the sweetness gets sickening or it becomes apparent that there's not a whole lot there, because on this track Regina does not equate sweetness and sugar to love:

“Whenever I'd eat, I just craved sweet
What I couldn't get at home, I got in the streets”.
I also love the way she was able to tie the narrative of the track into her upbringing and feeling emotionally starved at that point in her life.

There are other cuts here that remind me quite a bit of Regina's past work. Whether that be “One Man's Prayer”, where she's kind of diving into the internal monologue of a guy who is very self-obsessed and lonely and seeking out a relationship where he is essentially like worshiped, like a god to kind of fulfill him. Then, with what might has been, with lyrics like

“Living and dying go together
Business and crying go together
Passion and madness go together
Yellow and sadness go together”,

I mean, that's classic Regina all the way. But this track is probably also the most heavy-handed moment on the LP orchestrally. Regina even sings on top of these strings with a really wide open inflection as if she is a character in a Disney movie, which there is an appeal to that, I just don't know if it's for me. So yeah, the orchestrations being a little too much and overshadowing the song, they're supposed to be complimenting, at least a little bit, continues as an issue through the ending. Such as with “Spacetime Fairytale”, which at first does have more of a balance between the vocals the pianos, the timpani rolls, the strings, the woodwinds, but then we hit this very sudden jazzy piano transition that is complemented by what sounds like the quietest tap dancing solo ever. It directionlessly trails off in this way for a while until just like the finale instrumentation of the song just bursts in, like yeah, we've had enough of that, we're just gonna do this now.

“Coin” is a bit of a head scratcher too, though I do really love the narrative going on here lyrically, commenting on money and this coin being an object of payment toward a scientist, a baby, a president and then observing the various reactions or results that you get from that transaction.The track's structure introduces these huge instrumental bursts that sound like something out of a post rock song, though it is just strings it sounds like, but they're playing so quickly it's almost like tremolo guitars. And it's there, it's a thing, it's loud, I don't know if I would say it's a style that really complements Regina's vibe though. The closer I have reservations with as well, even on the songwriting side as the ending kind of fizzles out.

I'm torn on this LP, unfortunately. I think a lot of the songwriting for the bulk of the album is quite good, is quite interesting, I'm feeling like these rushes of nostalgia in a way, because there are so many tracks here that remind me of the way that Regina used to write songs in the 2000s, which you know it's cool that she's moved past that, but also exciting to hear her revisit these lyrical and thematic modes in some way. I feel like how towering the arrangements are kind of get away from the album quite a bit. Maybe if things had been toned down I would have found the record a little bit more interesting, but alas they weren't.

STRONG 6
