Hardy is a country singer and songwriter who is now doing his thing out of Nashville. We have his second full-length LP here, "The Mockingbird and The Crow", which kind of grabbed my attention at the start of this year because it was a pretty big country release. And on top of it, it's a double concept album, which there's not a whole lot of in the country sphere. I mean, that has been changing as of late, but country not exactly a genre known for its concept albums, known for its double albums. Was kind of curious if a guy like Hardy here has the power, the will, the artistry to change that. But if the genre is someday known for delivering that sort of thing, I hope it's not records like this that are brought up, because this was a wild ride and not in a good way.

Records like this put me in a really weird position, because there's a lot of people who would react to a review like this and say that I'm hating this album because I hate country music or I hate the culture that it represents or that it relates to, when in fact, I don't really have any issues personally with southern culture or rural life, small town living. I happen to think that there is a lot to that background and lifestyle and history. But it's records like this that kind of reduce it down to its dumbest, lowest common denominator elements. And rather than celebrating it for what it is or potentially could be, we are instead getting songs about Jack Daniels as if country music culture doesn't have anything to offer other than that. There are more references to Walmart on this record than there is to anything genuinely southern. Even the Bisquick shout out. I wonder if some of the lyrics on this LP are subtle product placement.

But let me kind of get into the concept of this double album. The record works in two halves. We have the first half, "The Mockingbird" half, which is where Hardy pretty much indulges in some very sanitary, over-produced, bland and difficult to listen to modern country, balladry, acoustics, just low-key tracks. Songs that have more of a sentimental, sad or maybe even hopeful angle, be that with the very nostalgic "Beer" or the track "Red" where Hardy is not talking politics, he's talking red lips and red this and red that, just beautiful things that are red that remind him of his upbringing in his past. Both those tracks are honestly disgustingly corny to me. What makes them even more difficult to listen to and most of the ballads on this LP is that the vocal harmonies are layered so aggressively and all sound like they have some kind of pitch correction on them. So it sounds like I'm listening to an AI country singer rather than a human perform them. Sometimes the volume on the singing is so high, it's kind of drowning out everything else.

There are some more interesting narratives popping up a little later in this half of the LP. Though "Wait in the Truck", which is a story song where Hardy comes across a woman who obviously has been through domestic abuse, and then he takes it upon himself to enact some vigilante justice. Narratively, that one obviously has its merits, but the track doesn't really feel like it centers around misogyny or abuse of women generally. It's more like one man's power fantasy in terms of getting the bad guy, as the track is not so much about what this woman has gone through, it's more about this guy being an angel for what he's doing. The song "Drink One for Me" is very heavenly sentimental cut, which obviously deals in death and mortality and passing over to the other side. And while I can sympathize with a track that deals in love and loss, hearing Hardy sing about:

"they ain't got beer in Heaven", —

so "Drink One for Me" is just too much. Aesthetically, the song has the glossy, gross, ultra shiny finish and veneer of a christian rock song, but lyrically it just sounds like a drinking song.

And so many of the tracks in the first half of this thing are couched in the worst, most stomach churning, most eye roll worthy chorus ideas. Like the song "I in Country" because:

"There ain't no I in country but there's a Y.O.U", —

oh yeah, baby, there's a Y.O.U in country. The following track "Screen" is even more inadvertently funny, where Hardy is taking it to technology. Oh, man, keep that phone in your pocket at the rock show. Pull the plug and break the glass. I don't want to see no more screens. What are you doing to me, God? And the lyrics about a baseball of lonely baseball getting dusty at Walmart? Because nobody's buying baseballs at Walmart. They're all on their iPads now.

The song "Happy" sees Hardy singing about happiness as if it's this character, it's a sentient being, like something from a Dr. Seuss story. Some of the bars here are cute, I can admit, but I don't really like the message. The song is couched in overall toward the end, as Hardy seems to think that people aren't happy just because they don't want to be, they're just refusing to be happy, they're refusing happiness. Happiness is banging on their door saying "please let me in, let me make you happy". And people are just refusing to be happy, they're letting in hate instead. What kind of hate we're talking about? I don't know. He doesn't really get specific about that or much of anything else. The possibility that people could be legitimately unhappy because of things happening to them or stuff that's out of their control doesn't really enter into the equation.

Of course, we also get some genius level art commentary with the track "Here Lies Country Music". Yeah, country music is dead. It's over. It's long gone. It's done. What did it die of? Hardy says a lonely broken heart. A lonely broken heart is the reason country is dead, not industry produced gobbledygook that is completely out of touch with the lives and hardships of average people coming from the regions of the country this music is supposed to represent, outside of just being like "you don't like screens and Walmart beer".

Following this, we have the title track "The Mockingbird & the Crow", which is a bit of a pass moment on the album because this is where we transition into the second half. This is where the concept of the record really comes into play and we're moving into a new phase now. The first half of the song is interesting and paints all the tracks we've heard up until this point in a weird light, because Hardy portrays himself as like a mockingbird, somebody who's copying sounds and songs that he's heard before. Which I don't entirely disagree with in concept, because all the tracks up until this point are really bland, unimaginative, derivative and don't exactly strike me as being based on an original thought from a guy who put a lot of effort into what exactly you're hearing. So, I guess that makes sense. But then from here, he transitions from "The Mockingbird" into "The Crow", which is kind of like this edgier birdsona. I'm not trying to make Hardy out to seem like a furry or anything. Do they have a different name for it if you're bird? If you're into birds? But yeah, I guess he moves into this other birdsona, which is like this darker, meaner, heavier, angrier, edgier, but still very derivative version of himself, where he is now yelling and screaming and howling over really heavy alternative rock riffs. He's sounding like Kid Rock a little bit here with some slight rap rock shouts and flows. Of course, the vocal mixing is still awful and somehow overpowers the entire instrumental, even though it's got heavy alternative rock flare. The music kind of sounds like something off a Puddle of Mudd record as well.

So now Hardy is fully transitioned into the crow. And what does the crow have to say that the mockingbird doesn't? Well, we get our first taste of that on the song "Sold Out", where Hardy reminds us that he's not sold out. He has no interest in selling out. What is he doing that signifies not selling out? Well, he has no problem with putting a dead buck on Instagram. Sorry, is that not selling out? If you were afraid of doing that, would that be a signify or you selling out? Also, take note of the fact that we've got our first full real rock song on the album. And the instrumentation sounds so gross, so stiff, so plastic, it doesn't even feel like I'm hearing humans perform it. Of course, on the song "Jack", just like with the song "Happy", he is singing from the perspective of Jack Daniels of liquor. Liquor is with you during this time, during that time helping you gain the courage to talk to that girl that you like and a host of other things as well. It's just so cheap and played out and gross and weird. It's trying to be so hard and dark and authoritative, but it couldn't sound more silly.

The irony of this track is that it's followed by "Truck Bed", which is more white claw than it is Jack if we're talking drinks. Because we legit have a piece of electropop country, it's got some of that twangy instrumentation, but it's got the electronic beats as well and some of the sugary synths. I mean, as a genre fusion conceptually, it's interesting, but given the taste and tact of everything you've heard so far on the album, presuming you've heard it, it goes over as well as anything else here. The whistles in the background too sound like something Peter Bjorn and John or like a freaking Pitbull song. We just did a song about not selling out, meanwhile if you ask me what a piece of sell out country would sound like, I would tell you this.

From here, we get more weird, commercially slanted attempts at fusing country music with other stuff. We have ".30-06", which sounds like Hardy trying to embrace a really bad pop punk aesthetic with these heavy pounding chords, sort of a snottier vocal delivery. Of course, it's cringe as hell, he should have gotten MGK to do a feature on it. Then, we have the overly dramatic "I Ain't in the Country No More" where he portrays himself as being in the city on this one and it's like a horrible place, he's so scared, he's so freaked out, we're not in Kansas anymore. There's a lyric on here about him like cutting his foot on glass. Wear shoes, bro. Put a pair of freaking shoes on. It sounds like he's having such a traumatic experience being in a place with sidewalks and pavement and stores that aren't Walmart. He also makes mention of loving where he's from and that he'll be the martyr for that. How? In what way who's crucifying you for being proud of where you're from or like being from a rural area? No one, literally no one.

Following this, we have the track "Radio Song" where Hardy tries to consciously parody or make fun of the idea of a radio friendly country song, which he starts kind of playing into that with some twangy acoustics and instrumentation, some vocals that sound like they're done in more of a traditional country style, but with maybe a bit of camp thrown on there for mockery purposes. But here's the thing, these silly, kind of listener friendly country sounds that he's playing with here, sound just like the country ballads on the front end of the record. How can you be here making fun of this sound when you were literally unironically producing exactly this, just earlier on the album in the first half? But then, from here we transition out of these friendly, happy-go-lucky country passages into heavy riffs and a breakdown and a part where Hardy says fuck. Oh yeah, he says the F word and that makes it not a radio song at all, not like there's loads of songs on the radio that just have the F word edited out of them and they're popular anyway.

And as if the vibes around this record couldn't get any more rancid, we have "KILL SH!T TILL I DIE" where Hardy makes a big deal of a hunting culture, but then also gun culture and owning as many guns as you can, because you want them for when shit goes down, when there's bombs in the sky. Bro, I have news for you, if there's literally a bomb in the sky raining down on you, all the weaponry, all the firepower in the world is not gonna save your life. If I see a bomb coming down and about to drop on me, I'm not going to suddenly wish man "if only I had 300 guns right now". I would be set. There's also a trap beat on this track, some death metal growls, some heavy alt metal riffs, it is so gross, it's so tacky.

And then, finally, we have the closer "The Redneck Song" — if I was a redneck, if I considered myself to be a redneck, I would find the song offensive, because it just sounds like a gross parody of things that could potentially represent me. This sounds like an SNL skit meant to make fun of people who think that they're rednecks. And again, why are the harmonies so damn loud? Why is there a Weezer-esque novelty guitar solo? Why are there so many Walmart shout outs? Walmart does not care about you, it is so sad and unfortunate and a reflection of the economic death of America that rural communities have become so depend ending on Walmart for their food and basically their shopping infrastructure that we have artists like this referencing it so often. And the fact that is not a discussion or even a mention at all on this LP, it's not trying to celebrate country and southern and redneck culture, but instead focuses on beer. God, take me away from this album and let no other album like it come across my path or desk into the future.

NOT GOOD
