The latest full-length LP from Fire-Toolz, aka singer, songwriter, producer, multi-instrumentalist and composer Angel Marcloid. Let me start off this review by saying: love her or hate her, Angel is a once in a lifetime artist, someone who has a legitimately bold and challenging sound during a time when it seems like little to nothing out there is genuinely surprising. And a lot of that comes down to her talents as a composer and a producer, but also the lack of borders around certain genres that I don't think anybody else would think to combine, as she seemingly thinks nothing of colliding vaporwave aesthetics with black metal, screamo, jazz, industrial music, IDM and glitch. And even that description feels reductive with the scope of her influences. It's a sound, if you can even call it a sound, that Angel has been perfecting for years with one project after the next. And now, "I'm upset..." is essentially the follow-up to the semi breakout record that Angel dropped a little while ago, "Eternal Home", which was a massive undertaking four discs of material. And even though it wasn't one of my favorite records of the year, I still left it astounded by the exciting clash of sounds and genres throughout it. I was also surprised by how grave and even fantastical much of the music on this project felt, despite how over the top and colorful and odd it is. Which is a stark contrast from other acts that take a similar everything, but the kitchen-sink approach, but use that in a way to embrace some sense of absurdism.

With Angel stuff here though, there's something refreshingly genuine and personal about it. Especially on the opener where you can catch Angel varying between black metal, death metal and even hardcore screams, placing that over dizzying break beats and what sounds like futuristic synth jazz meant to soundtrack "Sonic the Hedgehog" game. Meanwhile, the lyrical side of things is where stuff emotionally gets tangled. We're hit with a barrage of different emotions and experiences that read is pretty surreal and otherworldly. The progression isn't exactly hooky either, as Angel isn't typically one for big repetitive hooky choruses, which may or may not make this record someone's cup of tea. But I will say, this rarely does her music meander or lull aimlessly, it's always on to the next thing, and the melodies and arrangements often have a very sharp clarity to them. That makes reading them instantly pretty easy, even if there's not a whole lot of repetition or circling that going on.

This unorthodox approach to song structure does mean that some of these tracks go on some pretty interesting journeys. Like the heavenly droning ambient intro of "Mantra - Ing & Golgotha", underscored by what sounds like church bells, which quickly shifts into more intense passages of jazzy keys and glossy synths. But this time saxophone enters the fold to bring a sexy tone to it. Which makes sense, given the sensual angle of the lyrics, even if they are done in a harsh black metal style. There's a super heavy and dark industrial outro to the cut too. Over the course of this point, the lyrics take a change in tone as well, turning somewhat nightmarish. And while it is interesting, a lot of it came across to me maybe a bit too jarring to get immersed in it or appreciate what's going on in real time. I feel similarly about the song "Soaked" as pretty, as some of the guitar work is on the front end of that song. And I found myself having a somewhat difficult time settling in with the rest of the record as well. Which is odd, because I thought this would be the project I would click with for Fire-Toolz. It's shorter and maybe could be easier to digest than "Eternal Home". But ultimately, I ended up finding it a little less immersive on the whole. Which was not helped by the flow of the record overall feeling choppy and fragmented.

We have shorter interlude type tracks that go back to back on five and six, which is followed by one of the longest pieces on the record, expansive instrumental that combines elements of jazz, smooth jazz to be specific, jangly guitars and a primal groovy beat. There's something very new age and serene about the atmosphere surrounding all of it as well. And while it is an interesting centerpiece for the album, with a lot of skill playing, in terms of vibe I'm not sure if it's something I would gravitate toward on my own or outside of the context of this record, or even presume it was a Fire-Toolz' track.

However, there are spots on this thing I found to be genuinely exciting and explosive. Namely, "The Great Allower", which is insane heavy combination of, again, jazz, but staccato, bone crushing djent guitars, mathy grooves playing underneath all of this as well. What I was less enthused by on this record were the moments that felt more like unlikely studio jams and experiments. Such as "Gleam Beam", which is possibly the only fusion of vaporwave aesthetics and dungeons synth with some distant black metal vocals that I've ever heard. Can't say I've ever come across something quite like this. But did the performance and progression keep me on the edge of my seat? Not necessarily. There isn't a peak or a payoff to the song that makes all the tension building up until the second half worth it. Which I also felt for the track "Everything & Everywhere Is a Divine Mirror".

Some of the final moments on this LP get even more ambient. Like with "Above All Else I Want to See". But at least this cut is one of the longer ones on the record and I can drift off into its strange and oceanic layers of effects and bass and synths. Which feels like the soundtrack being stranded in space on a spaceship that's talking to you. There's the closer, which I thought was an epic moment of sorts, with passionate vocals, mystical synth leads, ambient tones droning into infinity in the background. It's a vibe for sure, but once again the progression of the track ultimately I wasn't gripped by.

So with this record all in all, I was excited by the unique and very weird array of sounds that it presents on the surface. Many of the instrumental performances on this project are impressive too. But I was left feeling less than thrilled by a lot of the compositional inner workings of individual tracks. And also didn't see the whole thing coming together that cohesively in terms of album flow too.

Лучшие треки: It Is Happening Again, I Couldn't Have Been Born at the Wrong Time Because I Was Never Even Born Lol!, The Great Allower, Above All Else I Want to See
Худший трек: Inlet / Paraklesis

DECENT 6
