The newest full-length LP from UK rock outfit Sleep Token, their third release, they have been consistently dropping albums at a pace of every few years since their debut in 2019. And maybe the most complimentary thing I can say about Sleep Token off the bat is that they are certainly a band that sounds like they are of the current era, with combinations of sounds and genres that I could only see being stirred together right now. As Sleep Token is known for this strain of alternative metal that incorporates elements of pop music, a very heavy djent guitars, also even R&B on some of the vocal deliveries and chord progressions, and it's all assembled with a very punchy high gloss finish. Now, from what I've heard of Sleep Token stuff in the past, it couldn't be further away from something I would generally see myself enjoying. But I went into this thing because you never know. Could work its magic on me. But unfortunately, I'm not into this record and I will do my best to explain why.

One, the performances and production, usually I'm not a huge fan of records that sound so robotic and neatly assembled that there's little to no human touch to what I'm hearing. There's something about numerous passages of this record that sounds so artificial and septic, especially during some of the more ornate instrumental passages on this thing. Like with the cut "The Summoning", it comes across as calculated and cold and uninviting, like I'm hanging in a textureless, featureless room, with lots of gray furniture around and some gentle music playing over loudspeakers to make me feel calm, when in reality I couldn't be anything, but anxious, because this feels like a prison. And considering a lot of the booming beats and over-the-top vocals and grand instrumentation laced into these tracks, what Sleep Token is doing on this record in the abstract is not that much different than what you might hear on Imagine Dragons record: obviously geared toward a more alternative audience, it's still as overblown, and the sound of it is way bigger than the actual ideas it's getting across. There's not a single track on this thing that I enjoy the sound of truthfully. Even with attempts on this thing to go big and go epic. Like on the song "Are You Really Okay?", where all the rich and pretty instrumentation is piling on top of itself so chaotically, because there's no real order of operations here, there's no foreground, there's no background, it's all loud as hell and crumbling out of the weight of itself and sounds horrid. I could take or leave the heavier and more aggressive moments on this LP too. Take the whooping djent guitars on the opening track, which sound almost like a parody of the genre. And even spots in the tracklist like "Vore" leave me cold, where we get the dense and distorted metalcore bands like Converge are known for, but the riffs and rhythms are nowhere near as intense or interesting.

Two, second major issue with this record is its genre combinations. I'm going to be straightforward about this one and say obviously, even though there are lots of people who disagree and love this band and love this album, I don't think pop friendly metal crushing prog riffs, flowery instrumental passages and touches of R&B vocals are the most compelling combination of styles, especially when Sleep Token is often borrowing from the most obvious and surface level ingredients of each genre. It would be one thing if this record sounded like Prince meets Meshuggah, meets Faith No More. But what "Take Me Back to Eden" actually offers is like a top 40 randomized Frankenstein monster, masquerading as something deeper than it actually is, as the band presents itself as something very mysterious and anonymous, when the music in some cases couldn't be more plain as day and crude. Like with the song "The Apparition", where we get a lot of booming, but bland guitars, sequence beats, ultra digital vocal effects that leave me feeling like am I even listening to a person saying. Is this AI or something? There's also "Do You Wish That You Loved Me (Dywtylm)", which is uninspired electropop at the end of the day. It's painfully on the nose with its rigid beats and vocal effects making it sound like it's a robot trying to show emotion, asking questions like "can we hit delete", as the lyrics deal in this romantic scenario that's full of regret and things that one wish they could take back.

I feel like a lot of the different genre elements on this record come together in a very tacky way. I don't care for it. And I also don't care for the vocals, which are painfully melodramatic, over enunciated and processed to high heaven. It's like everything that's corny and unbearable about the singing that you might hear on an Evanescence record, but multiplied by 5-6-7-8-9-10 times. On top of that, we also have the progy song structures that I'm not all that into, which inherently I don't think is a bad thing. But when you're talking about vocals, and production and songs that you don't care for off the bat, the last thing that you want them to do is last eight minutes. But I suppose that could easily be a positive for anyone who enjoys what Sleep Token is doing on this record. This album and its instrumentation are very neatly assembled, it's performed and groomed in such a way where everything is meant to sound super clean and perfect. I suppose that is maybe the nicest thing I can say about it. Because outside of that, I don't get much out of this album. From the songs, to the lyrics, to the soundcraft, to the quirky clashing genre combinations, to its overall lack of depth, despite the fact that the record very much seems to be convinced that it is hitting upon some profound stuff.

Yeah, this Sleep Token record is bland, it's boring and it's frankly annoying to listen to.

FAV TRACKS: N/A
LEAST FAV TRACK: DYWTYLM

LIGHT 2
