This is a brand new LP from pop singer and songwriter Kesha, album number five from her in fact. Of course, many fans remember Kesha for the unhinged party bops she dropped in the early 2010s, but she's been on a very different creative trajectory for a minute now, embracing a wider array of musical influences and releasing a lot of tracks with more of a ballad and singer-songwriter type angle, redefining her art and bringing more depth and personal experiences into it. It's no secret this change coincided with the very explosive falling out that Kesha had with Dr. Luke, a man who once masterminded the sound and production side of her albums and signed her to his Kemosabe Records label toward the start of her career. Between all the allegations of abuse and defamation claims, there have been numerous suits and counter suits filed, Luke had even taken legal action against Kesha's mom over public statements. And while the court battles currently have settled down for a moment, they are still ongoing. And understandably, there is still a lot of animosity and distance between Kesha and Luke, as his name is nowhere to be found in the liner notes and the credits of this record. And it would seem that Rick Rubin has stepped in to helm this thing, with names such as Hudson Mohawke and Stint orbiting around various tracks from this LP. And of course, also the title and cover of this record are an obvious reaction to the legal orders Kesha is currently under to not talk about these allegations that she has against Luke. All that and this record shows that Kesha is still locked into her deal with Luke and RCA, because this album has come out on his label.

In so many ways, this record is a rebellion, sometimes a quiet one, as there's obviously details Kesha lyrically can't go in into due to current legal restrictions. But also, Kesha is clearly not giving a shit about pop or commercial appeal on this record too, which has led to this record failing to garner the kinds of numbers that her past work has. But that is often the case for raw and pure expressions of emotion in the music industry. The promotion of this record kicked off with songs like "Fine Line" and "Eat The Acid". Easily two of the weirdest singles Kesha has ever released, but also two of my favorites. The former is an otherworldly shimmering ballad with a lot of hushed, whisper quiet vocals, with Kesha lyrically meditating on being in this limbo space as of right now, between being relevant and also washed up, between being happy and depressed, between fighting on and giving up. The latter of these two tracks is an eerie and eye-opening motif on psychedelics and having transcendental experiences, seeing things you can't unsee. And I love the way the refrain of this song starts as repeating little vocal sample, and then as the track progresses it expands and opens out into a fuller, more melodic chorus. The eerie synth chords and vocal layers on this song have a dark intensity to them that's incredible. One more teaser to the record was "Only Love Can Save Us Now", which is a little more commercially friendly, but still kind of left field for Kesha, considering the clash of styles going on: we have massive, cinematic, gospel inspired choruses, which transition suddenly out of grimy beat back verses that see Kesha singing, rapping in a fashion that is akin to what she used to do on her first couple of albums. Feels like the old Kesha coming back, but with a new purpose in a way. And the track somehow works, despite various sections of the song being so separate.

I'm happy to say these tracks work into an overall pretty solid tracklist. The opener "Something to Believe In" may not be my favorite song on the LP, but I do love how mystical the instrumental sounds and how the track effectively segues so nicely into "Eat the Acid". In a way that makes it feel almost like a prelude. "Living in My Head" is an acoustic ballad with gentle and lovely vocal harmonies and heart-wrenching leads. Meanwhile, "The Drama" is another one of the oddest songs Kesha has released, it sounds like what you would get if LCD Soundsystem produced a Tune-Yards track, with colorful vocal harmonies and all. You've got driving analog electronics and beats in the background. Not to mention the harsh and dissonant screeching wall of tones that pops in around the second half, the key change right after too. The song is insane, but also genuinely fucking art.

I will say, overall, while this record is a little front loaded, the second half doesn't have as many hard-hitting moments. "Too Far Gone" is by far one of the more underwhelming songs in the tracklist, it's a little basic musically and vocally, especially when you consider how out there some of the other material on this project is. Then, "Peace & Quiet" is the most obnoxious song in the tracklist sadly, with all grading auto-tune vocal layers that hit on the chorus that feel like they're trying to make a nod toward hyperpop, something in that realm, but not quite nailing it. Then, "Hate Me Harder", one of the final tracks on the record, in a lot of ways has all the trappings of a cliche millennial radio friendly piano ballad. Kesha does kill it and sells the emotion of the song, essentially addressing her detractors, her haters and welcoming whatever negativity they have to throw her way, saying all that hatred is more about them, than it is about her, which is true. The track overall is simple, but effective. Meanwhile, the closer "Happy" is another acoustic cut on the project. Kesha embracing her singer-songwriter side once again, the tune and progression are a little bland, but lyrically it is compelling, with Kesha going over all the regret and trauma she's dealt with over the course of her music career. Which she's still dealing with. And yet, she opts on this album to be happy and be herself despite it all. So again, while I'm not crazy about the song itself and the composition, I can at least say this album ends off on a positive and a good sentiment.

It's unfortunate to still see Kesha in this position where she is locked into a label deal and a business deal that she clearly wants no part of. Obviously, one can work in a metaphor here about the caged bird's singing. But at the very least, it's clear to see that Kesha right now in her career is loving and having fun with an incredible amount of creative freedom, even with her having to name this record "Gag Order". And that creative freedom has resulted in some of her best and most interesting work so far, even if it's not as viral or as commercially friendly as a lot of her past work has been.

FAV TRACKS: EAT THE ACID, LIVING IN MY HEAD, FINE LINE, ONLY LOVE CAN SAVE US NOW, THE DRAMA, HATE ME HARDER
LEAST FAV TRACK: PEACE & QUIET

LIGHT 7
