This is a new mixtape of material from Detroit duo Snow Strippers, which is masterminded by producer Graham Perez and vocalist Tatiana Schwaninger. These two have been making intense waves in the electronic music underground as of late, somehow mustering enough buzz to land a Lil Uzi Vert feature and they only dropped their debut album last year. And now, they're following it up with this project right here less than 12 months later, and I'm hearing a lot of creative parallels to the debut.

What we have here, again, is an onslaught of over a dozen tracks that are a very punchy and cut to the chase fusion of techno and fuzzy lo-fi electropop, pretty much everything you need and nothing you don't on all these two to three minute cuts — driving beats, very grainy and somewhat distorted, but sweet synth leads, ghostly and surreal, disorienting effects, haunting and infectious lead vocals as well. And when you're not getting a clean, straightforward lead on a track, often there will be vocal samples or vocal chops that are arranged in such a way where it's just really snappy.

When reading into Snow Strippers, I was catching a lot of comparisons to indie electronica darlings Crystal Castles, which I wouldn't say is totally unwarranted, but it's not a one-to-one comparison. Each duo respectively has very different approaches to vocals. Plus, Snow Strippers on this project show very little interest in embracing punk or glitch aesthetics. Though, the 8-bit synths on "It's a Dream" did surprise me a bit. While, I don't think the comparison is super close, I will say this, I haven't heard something this visceral and this consistently good in the electroclash lane since Crystal Castles. Which may also be reason for the comparisons. And it's funny, because I don't think Snow Strippers is doing anything especially flashy or novel and sometimes even skillful in this genre. I mean, being raw and maybe even a little sloppy in some instances is the point. Look at the song "Sick" for example, whose mix is so loaded with bleed between the synthesizers and the delay soaked vocals and the bass. Then, occasionally all of those sounds are overpowered by these random hits of robot vocals, saying _"that's fucking sick"_. And then, there's also the fragmented synth sequences on "I'm on My Own". Also, the disorienting stops in the beat here and there on "Depriving You", which are almost too unhinged. So, in addition to this record not being revolutionary, it's also not a pursuit of perfectionism, that's for sure.

However, I still think the less is more fast and loose approach the duo applies to this project works in their favor, as they pretty much deliver a series of infectious songs with very simple and effective ideas, almost without fail for one track after another. The tunes on these cuts are often so strong, they shine through whatever chaos Graham and Tatiana are subjecting them to, with droning tones and psychedelic delays and suffocating hits of bass. Be that on "Your Ridicule" or "It's Goin Bad" or "Fake Smile", on the opening track again. All of which have lead vocal melodies that are so strong, they can't be killed with the weirdly claustrophobic mixes that we have on this mixtape. Which in a way I still think adds to the experience slightly, because this record isn't just a vibe, it's not background music. The beats and the bass, and the volume don't let up its borderline confrontational, you have to engage with these songs, they force you to dance with them. While the tunes are there, sometimes the beats on these tracks are enough. Like the shimmering synths and what sounds like side chained bass or kicks on "Lacerate", which gives the song effect of being woozy, it's like the whole wave form of the song is throbbing as it's grooving along. There's also the overwhelming bliss of "Don't You Feel", where the slower, meditative tempo on this one really enchants me, then you have those futuristic woodwind sounding synths, it's like something from another dimension. And of course, there's also the whooshing tones and rigid grooves of "Now It's Not the Same", which is exactly the kind of techno chaos I'm trying to get into.

A lot of this record's appeal comes down to chaos, but there are direct and catchy moments of clarity too. Be that on "Under Your Spell", which has one of the most intelligible vocal parts on the entire project that also goes for "Like to Complicate" too.

Bt overall, this mixtape is kick ass, it's good, it's slightly one-dimensional in terms of its overall vibe and sound. There's not that much versatility to it at the end of the day. But I still will say the dirty left-field aesthetics of this project are to its benefit, even if there are moments where I wonder how much slightly cleaner production would improve its appeal. There are a few tracks that feel redundant in the batch here and maybe a couple others where the rougher edges could have been smoothed out for a better overall experience. The Uzi track also ended up being one of the weaker spots here too. But with all that being said, I loved this thing, I thought it was entertaining and a non-stop groove fest.

FAV TRACKS: AGAIN, UNDER YOUR SPELL, NOW IT'S NOT THE SAME, DECEITFUL EYES, LIKE TO COMPLICATE, YOUR RIDICULE, LACERATE, IT'S GOIN BAD, KINDA LIKE IT THAT WAY, FAKE SMILE
LEAST FAV TRACK: IT'S A DREAM

LIGHT 8
