This is a brand new LP from Virginia rapper McKinley Dixon, following his pandemic breakout record for "For My Mama and Anyone Who Look Like Her", a record of ornate, dense and conscious jazz rap that made for one of the best underground releases of that year. Though, maybe not the most distinct, considering some of the comparisons it drew to artists like Kendrick and Avantdale Bowling Club. But the rapping and instrumentals across this LP were pretty solid, even if very obviously they were homespun and a little rough around the edges. Ultimately, came away from this project thinking Dixon was an artist worth watching, so that's why I checked out this new project. Which going into it, I was surprised and maybe a little worried, because it was 20 minutes shorter than its predecessor and doesn't even reach 30 minutes in length. Is this thing even an album? Is it a glorified EP? I don't know. But after listening to it, even though this thing is paired down runtime wise, I found the rapping to be more distinct this time around and the instrumentals are freaking incredible and totally next level, fitting again in that jazz rap pocket, but now they're grand, layered, mountainous.

Right from the start of this thing it's clear that McKinley is going to be coming from a different place sonically and instrumentally, bringing us on a journey that is going to be more cinematic. Because track one we have "Hanif Reads Toni", which is a spoken word interlude/intro and a pretty eerie reading of a Toni Morrison passage, one that shifts between sounding idyllic and also unsettling. This passage ties into the record once again later on the song "Dedicated to Tar Feather", which may also be another allusion to Toni's work, because the nods to her don't just make for a cool little poetic intro on this album, the influence runs deeper than that, as even the title of this record itself is a nod to three books in her "Beloved" trilogy. And furthermore, you can tell from McKinley's pen game that he's well read and has a narrator's heart and wants to write and assemble something that is larger than himself.

Which is apparent right from the first full song on the record "Sun, I Rise", an honest to God stunner between its harps and big drums and flowery strings. Listening to this song feels like hanging in the classiest, most well-decorated room, it's giving a Little Simz "SIMBI" levels of grandiosity with the background instrumentation. And once more, Dixon is sounding more expressive than ever on the vocal and lyrical side, especially in the second verse as he's dropping lines like:

"We bent the block so many times, car almost slipped right over,
Said I became a better liar as I've gotten older,
Is it cuz the tongue got sharper or cuz my heart got colder".

Again, moving, poetic, incredible start to the project.

"Mezzanine Tippin'" by comparison isn't as sweet on the ears, but it is a superb expression in griminess. The loose and noisy percussion sounds like bike parts rattling, coins dropping, chains, the blood curdling, strings on this track are amazing too, there are a lot of a very creepy, demonic doubled up vocals as well. It's freaky and deeply unhinged, easily the darkest pocket on the entire record. The rich piano chops and twinkling leads and big catchy group vocals make "Run, Run, Run" a lot more anthemic by comparison. It's a cute tune, but has a grave contrast as the chorus's lyrics deal in running away from guns and gunshots in a playground setting. And it's a song of survival and connecting with others, as well as persevering beyond the threats to your life in violent surroundings or suffering under a system that makes it more likely that you're not going to live past to your 20. It's ultimately a song of survival and connecting with others. Iin terms of its messaging and its background instrumentation, it's very The Roots-esque.

Then, there's the smooth and glamorous "Live! From the Kitchen Table", which not only spots a great feature from Ghais Guevara, but the sweet keys, the saxophones, the bass, how is all the instrumentation on this thing coming together, because it sounds better and richer than a lot of the stuff I hear on mainstream records. Somehow Dixon fit the sound of a big budget in a small package. There's also the grand horn lines on the track "Tyler, Forever", which sound like the grandiose horn sections that you hear attached to a marching band or a drum line, but with a Southern beat hanging in the back of it. And a handful of witty, metal themed bars before we hit one of the choruses on the song:

"9 niggas, masked up in a van,
Them boys Slipknot".

I also love the beat switch in the second half of this track too, where the instrumentation all of a sudden goes super soft, kind of fairy tale. We also have "The Story So Far (Interlude)", as well as the actual "The Story So Far" the song itself, where we hear our first major misstep on the project. Seline Haze's feature, as far as delivery and vocal presence, was okay, felt a bit off. Even the mix on it could have been a little better. Dig the vibe, dig the content, but I don't think it's the strongest placement on the record. But overall, even as a low point, it's not that bad, this track is still a pretty good overall and a pretty positive addition to a very solid tracklist. Which brings us to the very grand and jazzy closing title track with those nimble lead melodies and the group vocals and the kids chorus. Dixon is pulling out all the stops on this record and going all in on this 28 minute little project.

I'm amazed at how much meaning and emotional depth and complexity and punch this thing carries in the runtime time that it has. There's not a lot of material here, but what material is here is so damn good. There's not a lull, there's not a stop, there's not a nothing on this project. And even the moments that are introductory or a bit of an interlude, they still add so much to the record overall. This is one of the rare instances where an artist like shortens the length of what they're putting out and somehow ends up being more fire.

FAV TRACKS: HANIF READS TONI, SUN I RISE, MEZZANINE TIPPIN', RUN RUN RUN, LIVE! FROM THE KITCHEN TABLE, TYLER FOREVER, DEDICATED TO TAR FEATHER, BELOVED! PARADISE! JAZZ!?
LEAST FAV TRACK: THE STORY SO FAR

LIGHT 9
