This is the second full-length LP from this Pittsburgh band are releasing their album over here via the legendary Omaha indie label "Saddle Creek". I haven't been into feeble little horses stuff before, but what I can say is what I'm hearing on this record is really grabbing my attention in doing so in an interestingly subtle way. For what a lot of the surface elements of this record, run like your average home spun lo-fi indie rock affair — super fuzzy guitars with lots of distortion, drums often buried in the back, very understated and intimately miced lead vocals, a lot of doubles and overdubs with those two to make them sound a bit thicker. It's the thing I wouldn't normally gravitate toward these days, maybe thinking that the instrumentals were too basic, the vocals maybe came across as half-hearted. but feeble little horse actually brings a lot of interesting details on this short little record. And "Girl with Fish" is most definitely more than your average boilerplate bedroom rock indie stuff.

I mean, first off, the sound of this record is surreal and melty in the way shoegaze records often are. The instrumentals are packed with odd little beats that give these songs tons of character. Whether you're talking about the track "Tin Man", which is a very solid tune all around, but it's made even better with twangy angular acoustic guitar melodies, reversed, weird sound effects and metallic extra bits of percussion flying in and out of the mix here and there. Plus, warm and blissful walls of distortion on the chorus coming from the guitars are paired with calls vocally of "huh", which I don't think I've ever heard anybody throw a "huh" out there on an album in this genre. And yet, somehow it works.

"Steamroller" by comparison sonically isn't nearly as kooky, but its guitar noise and distortion and sweet little lead melodies all bleed into each other into perfectly engineered casserole of sound. It's an excellent lo-fi shoegaze vibes — it's melty, it's bright, it's crispy and also woozy all at the same time. I hear the My Bloody Valentine influence even more on the intro to the song "Sweet", after which the band expands into something musically that is way more specific to them, which is cool, with more angular guitar melodies and boy-girl vocal trades and even strangely enough breakbeats that somehow work. Then, "Healing" is a pretty acoustic guitar number that is orbited by all little fragmented notes that are very pretty, all of which underscores moving and simple poem about healing and the scars that are left afterwards physically and emotionally after traumatic events.

And then, there are some songs on this record that honestly I can't even begin to describe the sounds. Because I'm not entirely sure what their source is or they're so otherworldly and fuzzed out and weird that it's difficult to put into words. Be that on "Station" or the very climactic finish "Heavy Water", which at points is approaching old school Phil Elverum's The Microphones level of home spun studio trickery.

But this record isn't all funny sounds though. Some of the songs at their core are incredibly catchy. Be that on "Paces", which is loaded with sharp and chipmunked addictive lead melodies, some carefree acoustic guitar passages and the vocal melodies pop off too. There's also the funny and strange "Pocket", which has elements to it that remind me of Kimya Dawson's music, most notably the refrains of "Do you wanna be in my pocket, do you wanna be in my pocket", which oddly enough is not even the weirdest thing that is said on this song. Or done for that matter, because all the detuned guitar melodies are very odd as is the false stop in the middle of the track that makes it sound like the song ends out of nowhere before it quickly comes back with some of the harshest rushes of guitar riffs on the entire record, paired with screams.

The only moments on the record that I had reservations with were the very scant intro, which mind you a riff-wise does go hard, reminds me a little bit of the very underrated noise rock and pop record from the fuo No Age. There are some heightist lyrics on this track as well:

"How can you be satisfied, she's five for one, and you're six for five",

which the band could definitely get canceled for. Okay, I'm kidding. But I do wish there was more to this track and that it didn't feel quite so one-dimensional, especially considering many of the other songs on this record undergo some pretty wild and interesting shifts and changes across their runtime, even though they're not all that long. The band does pack a lot of detail into funny little lo-fi indie shorties. The track "Heaven" as well I found to be maybe a little undercooked in comparison with everything else here, there is that funny little instrumental switch toward the back end of the track. But everything up until that point compositionally seems a bit too overly simplistic given everything else here.

But overall, this feeble little horse record is awesome and rules and is sweet on the ears and fun and textured. It's catchy and creative and refreshing for some genres that are in need of a bit of a shake-up. There's definitely a lot more to this record than might meet the eye at first. And as I'm listening to it more, I'm having a good time peeling back its crazy little layers.

FAV TRACKS: TIN MAN, STEAMROLLER, PACES, SWEET, SLIDE, HEALING, POCKET, STATION, HEAVY WATER
LEAST FAV TRACK: HEAVEN

DECENT 8
