Josh Homme and the boys are back, brand new LP from veteran hard and alt-rock outfit Queens of the Stone Age, this is their seventh I believe. And it's one that I had a lot of high hopes for, considering at their last project "<a href="/videos/2360" target="_blank">Villains</a>" six years ago was a bit of a drop off in quality. However, that's not something I hold against the band too much as the album that preceded it was "<a href="/videos/964" target="_blank">...Like Clockwork</a>" and that is one of the best rock records of the 2010s most albums that would follow that would probably seem okay in comparison. As that record was so raw and well-written, but also very ornately orchestrated at points. The record was like an intricate house of cards, but the cards were razor blades and the razor blades were on fire for some reason. "Villains" though by comparison came across much more gray, not as ornate either, it was tough to dig as much entertainment out of it. And I was hoping in contrast "In Times New Roman..." would bring a bit more oomph, some more color, some more vibrance.

However, it was hard to tell if we were going to be in for that, given the teaser tracks to this thing. As the most defining characteristics of singles like "Carnavoyeur" as well as "Emotion Sickness" were loose and noisy and odd, which had me maybe anticipating a record that would be wild and out of control, in the vein of "Era Vulgaris". However, after having listened to this thing, that is most definitely not the record that we got. Because, while "In Times New Roman..." does have a similarly messy demeanor, it's not nearly as aggressive or chaotic, leaving the vibe of this record feeling a lot more like a cool leather jacket uncle drunk, dancing around, lampshade on his head, with lots of very woozy riffs and grooves, also some brash lyrics about the depraved and doomed society that we live in on the intro track. Some of the singing on this song as well is delivered in knowingly silly falsetto. Epic touches of strings contrast pretty harshly with very overblown guitar mixes that crash like heavy machinery.

For me, this thing is definitely more interesting than "Villains" right off the bat, because the band going off the rails a little bit is a good thing. However, as I listen to this record more and more, I wasn't entirely sold on what was being done here. The more slovenly approach the band takes on this record leaves a handful of songs feeling too slow, clunky, messy and careless in a very unflattering way. Like on "Negative Space" or the song "Made to Parade", which is maybe too zany for its own good: there's an unserious ghoulishness about it that sounds like something out of Marilyn Manson's "Mechanical Animals" era; seriously annoying, even if the harmonious builds of guitar toward the end of the track are pretty cool. And to go back to "Carnavoyeur", this track easily has the most lazy and uninteresting chorus on the entire LP; the transition into it does absolutely nothing the more, I hear it, the less it hits. And again I know the band is trying to play it a little looser this time around, but I feel like you can do that without making it sound like the drummers being made to play at gunpoint.

All that being said though, there's nothing on the record that sticks out as truly awful moments. There could have been some adjustments made, tracks I wanted more out of. And at the very least, there are some decent highlights to balance out the middling cuts. Whether that be "Paper Machete", which has some undeniably sick and catchy garage riffs: Homme's whaling lead vocals are on point too, this is handily one of the catchiest singles the band has released in quite a long time. There's also "Time & Place", which is a real romper, I imagine this track going over very well in a biker bar where everyone's wigged out on LSD: there's eerie lead vocals and animated lead guitars all over this track, as well as a steady riff that locks you in from beginning to end. I was surprised by "What the Peephole Say" as well, which in a lot of respects is like your average Queens of the Stone Age rager, but if you could splash in some new wave elements and have it work perfectly. And then, finally there's "Emotion Sickness", which I thought was the best single of the bunch on this album cycle: it's got a lot of crazy guitar leads that layer up in a very sour and chaotic way, some octave riffs that are very jumpy and remind me of "My Sharona" [The Knack]. The densely layered and harmonious hard rock hook on this track is fantastic too.

But beyond that, what we're mostly left with is the closer, which is a bit of a surprise as it's nine minutes long, it's expansive for a Queens of the Stone Age song. And while I appreciate the band is going for it, at the end of the day the song sounds like if ZZ Top were playing at the golf club, with some big string sections popping in here and there. Not to mention all the purposefully messy and weird production across this record isn't super appealing for long spans of time. So as a result, this track doesn't convey the dynamics or nuance you might want out of a song this long. Though it is cool that some of the opening musical themes came back via this little string section passage at the very end.

Overall, I thought this Queens of the Stone Age record was decent, passable, not the blowout or leapfrog over "Villains" in terms of quality that I was hoping for. Though, it does feel like, at least on the production end, the band is being a little bit weirder and trying to take a risk. But there are quite a few songs in the tracklist where I feel like that didn't pan out. Still, it does say something that the band has been at it this long and is yet to drop a truly garbage album, because even in its most unpalatable moments at least "In Times New Roman..." was interesting.

FAV TRACKS: OBSCENERY, PAPER MACHETE, TIME & PLACE, WHAT THE PEEPHOLE SAY, EMOTION SICKNESS
LEAST FAV TRACK: MADE TO PARADE

DECENT 6
