The new record from Atlanta rapper and songwriter Killer Mike, aka Michael Render who you might also know is one half of the hip-hop duo Run the Jewels. Mike has had a long and respectable history as a southern hip-hop artist: his first major feature was on Outkast "Stankonia" and he had a very steady run of five studio albums to follow, eventually forming a creative partnership with East Coast rapper and producer El-P, which led to the creation of his last full-length record 2012's "R.A.P. Music". The Great storytelling and highly agreeable takes on this thing aged pretty well. It's after the release of this record that El-P and Killer Mike would go on to form their duo and gradually released a very impressive run of four full-length albums, expanding the sound of hardcore rap for the modern era. Run the Jewels became so successful it would only make sense that Killer Mike focused a lot of his creative efforts into that duo as opposed to doubling back and releasing more solo stuff. But for whatever reason that we are, we are here at this point where Killer Mike has decided to drop a solo record, focus on his own musical lane. And honestly, going into this LP, I was pretty excited to hear that, not only because some of the singles to this record have been great, this album also sports the first Andre 3000 feature in two years, but also I still look back fondly on the personal and focused lyricism from rap music over a decade ago. And I was maybe even expecting Killer Mike to go more personal on this new LP, considering the title, the childhood photo on the cover. I mean, this could be a self and career defining record depending on how many layers he peels back. Plus, Mike's lyrical artistry has stayed pretty consistent over the course of Run the Jewels. So, there's is no reason why he couldn't make the best album of his career with "Michael". But despite some amazing highlights on this LP, I'm sad to say that overall it does leave something to be desired.

Yes, of course, there is some killer chemistry on this thing with long time collaborators or ATL Legends. The track "Don't Let The Devil" featuring El-P is just as great and hard-hitting as any Run the Jewels single. There's some stellar boom bap beats and looping soul chops in the instrumental too. You also have the opener "Down by Law" on this thing as well, which is scored by a southern rap beat, lots of bass in the mix, some anthemic horn lines and instrumentally some gospel undertones too. But most notably, there is an amazing CeeLo Green feature on the back end of the song, which makes for a stellar chase run to Mike's very bestial bars for the previous two minutes. They're "Scientists & Engineers" which features that Andre feature: Andre doesn't just appear on the track lyrically though, he is also in the mix on the cuts handful of production credits, which also features DJ Paul and No I.D. But this track is an insane confluence of sounds: you have slinky smooth guitar passages, fragmented analog synth sequences, some gospel style group chorus vocals too. It sounds like something from Kanye's "Yeezus" era, but somehow more intergalactic and insane. So, it might not be the most cohesive track on the record, but it's certainly the boldest and most surprising, especially with Andre bringing delivery and flow that feels like an eerier variation on what he did with the solo reprise from Frank Ocean's "Blonde". Future has some pretty catchy bars and lines, which are backed up by that gospel chorus too. And then, finally Killer Mike escalates things in a epic way on the back end of the track with all these relentless flows, his most raw and impressive performance as a rapper on the entire record.

There's some bangers on this thing and also some moments where Mike is digging deeper emotionally than he ever has before. Like on the song "Motherless". And who doesn't love a "love your mom" anthem? Especially when it is done as well as this. It's a perfect stage for everything that Mike is trying to convey in terms of his love for his mother and his grandmother who helped raise him, and just basically trying to relay to them everything he has achieved and succeeded in doing over the course of his life and his career. There's a deep cut I thought hit even harder emotionally, and that's the song "Slummer", which is all about a young summer love that develops into something serious, not just romantically, but the track is also about the repercussions of having unprotected sex at a very young age: there is an unplanned pregnancy, there is a tragic and surprising end to that, and the track essentially becomes a cautionary tale about parenthood in the hood.

But unfortunately some of the powerful moments on this record are a little canceled out by Mike attempting to engineer this tracklist to have maybe a little something for everybody. Most notably with the track "Run" where Mike is are trying to juice this thing commercially, because it does have some star power on it: there's an overly dramatic spoken word intro from none other than Dave Chappelle who sucks off Mike's ego a little bit at the start of this track. Instrumentally, we have a basic, more modern trap beat in the mix, sounds trendy, but also very repetitive and mind-numbing, go stale long before the track is over. And there's a Young Thug feature on the track too, which inherently isn't a bad thing, but Thug's bars and vocals don't back up or reinforce much of anything Mike is saying or doing on the song, it just feels very tacked on. It's also here on this track where Mike starts throwing out more political shots on the LP. And if you guys are familiar with Killer Mike, he's no stranger to throwing his political views out there. On previous records, I feel like that's mostly worked out in his favor, but on "Michael" I'm scratching my head, because I feel like a lot of it isn't fully lining up. In one breath, on a few tracks that open the album up Michael say stuff like "fuck your masters, slit their throats, free Larry Hoover, politicians are liars, fuck the system, it's trying to kill you, fuck the prison system". But then, also on a track like "Talk'n That Shit!"" he'll basically say anybody who is woker than him and critiquing him is doing so because they're broke or maybe even gay:

"Niggas talk to me about that woke-ass shit
The same nigga walkin' on some broke-ass shit
You see, your words ain't worth no money, I ain't spoke back, bitch
All of you niggas hang together on some Brokeback shit".

I'm sorry, are you 12 years old? Are you literally a 12 year old, boy? If you took these lyrics and you showed them to me and told me they were like some magger rapper from the Internet, I would have to believe you. On the same song he also argues that his haters are jealous, because he gets to hang out with politicians and stuff. The ones that, I guess, are also bad and liars. This is an odd brag, considering how Mike's attempts at being a social mediator between local officials and protesters during the 2020 Black Lives Matter demonstrations blew up in his face. It's hard to tell if he actually believes some of the stuff he's saying in moments like these or maybe he's just bad at taking friendly fire critique from people who mostly agree with a lot of what he says.

Either way, later on the record on the track featuring 2 Chainz he also brags about being a landlord:

"Fuck that rap and trap shit, I'm a landlord, bitch
Pay rent, pay rent",

which I'm not opening this review up for a debate on the ethics of renting property to people. But it certainly doesn't make you cool or even Mother Teresa no matter how affordable you deem the housing to be. And look, I'm not trying to hold Mike here to some impact possible standard, Lord knows that most rappers out there who are a bit more woke than others and threw with more social critiques, not every single thing that they say ages perfectly or is 100 correct. But Mike seems especially at odds with himself sometimes, and it's a little confusing. He even seems to waver on previous points about not being all that religious on the closing track "High & Holy". There's nothing wrong with being religious or spiritual, it's just that when Mike tends to say something out of song he sounds very bold and resolute about it, and he sounds equally bold and resolute when he says something that goes in the other direction. Which takes away from some of the quality of these songs and his larger points. He also seems eager to get the message out that he puts together on the track "Something for Junkies", which I know what he's going for here, but it's a bit of an awkward delivery method maybe. Because in one sense he's trying to put a face and a human personal touch on the struggle of addiction, even going as far as to tell the story of his own aunt who has her struggles with such. But simultaneously, the track is loaded with so much degrading language around addiction, junkies so on and so forth that it it's not nailing down what it's trying to nail down. If the compassion was fully there, some of the word choices would just be better.

But with all that being said with this album overall, I'm pretty mixed on it honestly. The instrumental palette is super inconsistent, some of the beats are plain with very little flavor whatsoever, others are beautiful and touching and immense and soul inspiring with gospel elements thrown in. Some of Mike's bars and rap performances are pretty standard by his usual standards, others go above and beyond. There are moments where he's making political points that seem to make sense and are pretty salient and well assembled, well thought out. Meanwhile, in other moments not as much.

Not an awful record though, there's just some low lights and some real dog do takes here and there.

FAV TRACKS: DOWN BY LAW, SHED TEARS, SLUMMER, SCIENTISTS & ENGINEERS, TWO DAYS, MOTHERLESS, DON'T LET THE DEVIL
LEAST FAV TRACK: RUN

LIGHT 6
