This is the latest full-length album from legendary Icelandic band Sigur Rós. Even though there has been some low-scale ambient and drone output from the band over the past 10 years, this is being billed as their first album in a decade. In a way, it is their most formal album experience since their 2013 record "Kveikur", which I didn't love admittedly. However, this new record out is making me miss these slightly dark turn the band took on that LP, even if at the time I didn't think they pushed it as far as they could.

Let me talk about the direction of this new record and then the execution. "Átta" is likely the band's most orchestral record yet, which I don't say with the knowledge that the group has never used this much arranged instrumentation on a record before and anything like that. I say that because I don't think sonically the band has ever leaned this hard simply on the orchestral bits, to the point where this thing is sounding almost like a modern classical album. And the electric guitars, the more rock side of this band's instrumental palette traditionally, isn't present. Some might react to that description and think "okay, does that mean the record is like a 2012's "Valtari"? It's a little ambient, it's a little dreamy, the strings are much more present. And I would say not exactly, because "Átta" is much more direct in its songwriting and structuring. Many of the tracks end somewhere between four and five minutes, not a whole lot of time is spent building or meandering, wandering about super rich and ornate instrumental palettes. The song structures are pretty cut and dry and not super build oriented.

And over a lot of this chamber instrumentation you will often hear frontman Jónsi's lead vocals soaring above it all like an angel or a cherub, a very boyish inflections. However, I will say his singing doesn't come across with nearly as much personality as it has on past records such as "Takk...", like in the very intimate moments of that LP. In general, that is a clear-cut a description I can give in terms of this record's stylistic direction.

Let me get a little bit into the execution, which is less than desirable. This band has been incorporating strings and horns and ornate arrangements into their very fantastical brand of rock music for years, decades even. So if they were to lean simply on the arrangements, they should hypothetically totally nail it. But in fact, they don't, far from it and for a handful of reasons.

The instrumental palettes are flavorless, they're redundant, they're one note, pretty much sounding like the same ill-defined blob of dense and compression heavy strings for track after track. Which is surprise, because for bands that are typically affiliated with that post-rock genre, dynamics is the thing, dynamics is the name of the game. You start playing a track that at one point is very subtle and very soft, and very quiet, eventually progressing to something gargantuan and loud. And it's cool that after so many years Sigur Rós may want to back off of that formula a little bit, but that doesn't mean you throw dynamics entirely out of the window and deliver a bunch of completely bricked out string pieces. This thing is more like a monolithic, sterile tundra, where not a single thing thrives. And nothing against very desolate and apocalyptic records, but that is very much not the vibe this record is going for. And that feeling of everything being so samey isn't limited to the mixes, it's also the vocal performances and melodies, many of which move at a very glacial pace and don't have very distinct or memorable characteristics to them.

So overall, not a single truly stood out to me to be honest. And I'm floored that anybody's been finding this record to be all that mystical or enchanting, spellbinding, because I thought much of the time it was very a detail deficient and painfully basic to be frank about it. What's the point of leaning in so heavily on all these orchestrations if at the end of the day it's all going to sound so airbrushed and artificial and textureless? More or less I feel like I was listening to slight variations on a lot of the same melodic and sonic ideas for track after track for just under an hour. Even the 9 minute closing track I thought was gonna maybe pull out all the stops, do something big, was a massive disappointment, as the core song ends at around the 5 minute mark. And then, from there we get a lot of the same themes being played over, until the true ending of the track's runtime by some very ambient leaning synths and that's all.

All things considered, "Átta" is truly the least adventurous, interesting and versatile record from this band. If you've heard several tracks from it, you've pretty much heard the whole thing. Nearly everything they've released up until this point blows this project out of the water, I would even take some of the weird little ambient side routes the group has been releasing as of late over what they did here.

FAV TRACKS: N/A
LEAST FAV TRACK: 8

LIGHT 4
