This is the 16th full-length LP from legendary and influential experimental rock band Swans who have just tied up a mind-blowing comeback run through the 2010s, resulting in not just some of the best material of this band's multiphased career, but some of the best rock records of that decade, with massive and daring projects like "<a href="/videos/698" target="_blank">The Seer"</a>, "<a href="/videos/1948" target="_blank">The Glowing Man"</a>, as well as "<a href="/videos/1266" target="_blank">To Be Kind"</a>. It's even arguable that this has possibly been the most fruitful era for the band creatively, even if the last record "leaving meaning." had me feeling like Michael Gira and the band was beginning to paint themselves in a corner or just run out of inspiration a bit with their current formula of long, grim, repetitive, layered and infinitely growing experimental rock epics. But it did look like "The Beggar" was going to be a bump up in terms of ambition.

In terms of runtime, this is another 2 hour monster being added to the band's catalog, with potentially the most epic undertaking of the band's career up until this point, a 43 minute track titled "<a href="https://youtu.be/en1Tf4PwcWo" target="_blank">The Beggar Lover (Three)</a>". However, I didn't get the sense that we were going to be getting any major changes in sound or style on this record from the first couple of teasers. As I found both "Paradise is Mine" and "Los Angeles: City of Death" to be so deja vu and repetitive in terms of what the band has been doing stylistically and aesthetically for the past decade. Which isn't inherently a bad thing, as what Swans does musically within the confines of rock is pretty unique. The issue is, though the longer Swans hangs in this territory, the more obvious it is, there is very little left to conquer. Because, while "Paradise is Mine" does remind me of any number of Swans highlights from the past 10 years, it just feels painfully mild in comparison, in terms of execution and the peak of intensity it reaches. Even the cartoony "wooh" background vocals just don't make for much of a showstopper. And even the larger guitars and vocal build toward the end of the track feels very standard for Swans at this point.

I would say, "Los Angeles" doesn't bring much more inspiration or intensity to the table too — it's a track that weirdly I feel like I had already heard before I finished it, and it comes to a pretty fizzled out conclusion as well. The only things I could give this song at the end of the day is that it doesn't overstay its welcome and it does add to the record's overall themes of death, the arrival of something inevitable, consumption, especially in regards to a parasite host dynamic.

These were the teasers, which I was not that much into. Thankfully though, once I dugged deeper into the record, I was able to get some fresh rewards out of it. There's the opener, which isn't super new for Swans in the grander scheme of things and I don't love it as an opening track, but it does have one of the best progressions on the entire record and does set up the album's main core themes pretty well. The fragility of life, especially Michael's life, as much of this album is Michael just being fixated on his own mortality. There's a lot of focus on truth and understanding with the song as well, which may be some meta commentary from Michael on the audience-artist relationship. Whether that be:

"Crucified in fractured fields of blue
All information is equally true",

or:

"I wonder if an image is realer than the thing
I wonder if I'm singing what you're thinking me to sing".

We get even deeper into these ideas further into the track:

"The deeper into space, the smaller that you'll go
The more that you consume, the less you'll ever know
...
Am I broken into pieces to be scattered in the wind?
When the revelation comes, does it erase the host that lives".

Things get pretty meta and self-referential on another highlight from the record too, "Michael is Done", which has some of the most chilling lyrics on the entire record. Listening to the words Gira has pulled together on this song, I feel like I'm watching him waste away before my eyes. We hear more about this unstoppable force, that is death, and this song also functions as a means of highlighting conflicting feelings of living and surviving, but also coming to terms with the fact that you're not going to live forever:

"Every hole is a leak when Michael does speak
But Michael will win there's a flame on his tongue
His words are burnt meat to muscle and rend".

These words eventually give way to this super bright, heavenly, almost blissful wall of sound that reminds me of something off of Spiritualized record. And while I do wish it reached a slightly higher peak, as far as layers and in volume at the very finish, it's still one of the most beautiful and powerful and moving moments on this project. Which also goes for the song "Unforming", in terms of instrumentation and tone almost has the makings of a lullaby. And I'm loving the acoustics in the mix, the sparkling tones, I feel like I am just sitting there and witnessing a very intimate live performance. Some of the most moving lyrics on the entire LP land on this track too, with Michael reflecting on and coming to terms with some of the changes that he's facing here, finishing things off with a very grand mantra of "freedom, freedom, freedom from fear".

The track "No More of This" also scratches a similarly mystifying itch. And yet, again, provides a sense of finality. It's a goodbye and a statement on non-existence. And with huge passages of bells and group vocals, once again Swans are reaching a uniquely heavenly peak, with a great instrumental progression and a closing spoken word passage that reads as assuring and hopeful in a way. The track "Ebbing" shows more acoustic guitars leading the way, with some wonderous synths filling up the background too, I feel like I'm about to go on a psychedelic, meditative spirit journey, with the cult of people singing along with Michael in the recording. And this track does build toward one of the most satisfying climaxes on the entire project, like a total spiritual transcendence.

Even if this album on the whole isn't rocking me with the intensity or the grandiosity of many previous Swans albums, I'm still deeply grateful for what Michael was able to provide in this moment of the record at the very least. However, I will say the ending of the 1st disc does leave a bit to be desired. It does contain some cinematic layers of vocals and guitars, sure. There are some chilling lyrics on the track too, but it just feels like an eerie epilogue of sorts. And personally, the tone switch takes away from the magic of the previous track.

We have disc 2, the bulk of which is allotted to that 43 minute song that I mentioned earlier. And this track is a mix of a lot of different things, it's almost like a montage of sorts. A moment of reflection where Michael goes on a memory packed death journey. It's a multiphased epic with a lot of different bits of sound play that reminds me of past Swans classics, like "Soundtracks for the Blind", or even Michael Gira's experimental, psycho, ambient, collage project "The Body Lovers / The Body Haters". You have a passage of spoken word from Michael's wife what sounds like a creaking and banging wood, thunderous drums that sound bigger than a storm or like an earthquake. There are some passages of very cultish chorus vocals, some swelling instrumentation underneath. Other highlights along this odyssey include a very creepy, unsettling linear rock passages that are hypnotizing. Which read not too much unlike a lot of the work the band has been dropping for the past decade. In fact, there are numerous songs from the band's recent material that are interpolated along the runtime of this track. Namely, the respective title tracks of "The Glowing Man" and "leaving meaning.", as well as "Cloud of Unknowing", "Finally, Peace" and "It's Coming It's Real". Further into the track, we have the cycling, squeaking sounds and noises that are putting me on edge, some disorienting vocal fragments, primal rhythms what sounds like a recording of one of Michael's kids singing a nursery rhyme. I would say, the passages on this track, that continue from here, continue to be odd, but are a bit less gripping, as very little of any one thing with this very long cut reinforces any other thing. And as I listened to it, I felt like a lot of the stimulation and novelty I got from it mostly came from everything feeling as jarring and as surprising as it was. But that wore off the more I listened to the track.

And while I do like the idea, the concept of this track being reflective and a retrospective, almost like an experimental rock, I thought the actual experience of listening to it wasn't as engaging as it could have been. There's powerful parts, pivotal moments, but they're not arranged or assembled in a way that leads to maximum impact, or memorability.

Similarly, I was somewhat let down by the track to follow, "The Memorious". Yes, it does have some dark and twisted guitar grooves in 3/4. The lyrics on this track also reinforce the idea of Michael's past haunting him in a way and also being gone now, not being in existence any longer. The song has something to say for sure, it's a very personal and evocative imagery in the lyrics. But the track just plateaus out of the gate, it hits a 7 in terms of energy level and then just stays there and does not waver or move for any reason. And the whole thing ends as unceremoniously as it starts.

Personally, I don't think the flow of the 2d disc is as good or as compelling as the 1st. And the first 9 songs of this album, while not perfect, do a much better job of conveying Michael's feelings on existentialism and mortality.

Still, with that being said, overall, this is a very good album from Swans, even if I don't love it. There are some parts instrumentally and aesthetically feel very samey and recycled, almost as if they were from recently released records. Some instrumental peaks didn't go as far as I hoped that they would. And there are some progressions instrumentally on these tracks, like on "The Beggar", that I just don't find to be that gripping. The execution and flow are just not the best. And I feel like those elements are pivotal, especially for such a long record. And look, I'm someone who historically has enjoyed a lot of Swans recent and very long releases.

So, those are my major qualms with the record. But with that being said, the songwriting for the most part is on point, production is fire, some of the best lyrics on any Swans album ever for sure. Love the lyrical focus, the themes, the concept. There were just some pockets that were leaving me underwhelmed here and there. And the whole thing started a lot stronger than it finished.

FAV TRACKS: THE PARASITE, MICHAEL IS DONE, UNFORMING, NO MORE OF THIS, EBBING
LEAST FAV TRACK: THE MEMORIOUS

DECENT 7
