Here what we have is the third full-length LP from California music collective, consisting writers, rappers, singers Jadagrace, SWIM and TJW, the last of whom also takes on some production duties with this record. But outside of him, there's a handful of other producers involved throughout the rest of the project. These guys have been grinding in the industry for a while, both in and out of music, and I'm not surprised because listening to this record they're sounding pretty seasoned. This is clearly not their first rodeo, even with the first single "Funkfest", which was a pretty exciting and unique clash of post-punk basslines, driving beats, hyped group chants and some pretty silly, but sharp verses throughout the track too. It's a mix of influences and styles that on paper should not work, but in practice they somehow do.

With the rest of the record still to be revealed at the time, I had no idea what to make of what grouptherapy was going to do on this thing. Was this going to be some weird experimental rock/rap/pop fusion? But now that I've heard the entire album, grouptherapy is actually more creative and versatile than I could have imagined. Coming away from this record, it's clear that these guys are not musicians, but students of popular music too, with how effectively they reinterpret, recreate, rehash and recombine so many different ideas.

Take the first full track "American Psycho" — dramatic, distorted guitars, slowly intensifying rap verses, as well as piercing auto-tune vocal harmonies on the hook. The track is a huge show of sound and emotion right at the start of this album. It sounds like the fusion of Brockhampton, but also Kanye's "Yeezus". And even if the influences are obvious, I'm pretty stunned at how hard the chorus goes and how well the various elements on this track work together without sounding like a hideous mess that's at odds with itself. With the next track, we have an instant switch up, that would be "Smiles", which is very classy, but melancholy piece of jazz rap, with fragmented piano chords a-la Kendrick Lamar. But grouptherapy does take a different approach on this track lyrically and vocally, with a sharp focus on the idea of being depressed, being sad, bottling it up, smiling over the pain, that smile becoming a choker. The group was quick to throw us into a very emotional and introspective moment right at the start of this record.

And then, they're as quick to throw us into the song "Lightspeed ~>", which is a super dark and gritty piece of hip house, with thumping kicks, gurgling bass, lots of deadpan spoken word bars throughout the track. And even as the song explodes, it stays pretty moody, like I'm watching the most dramatically lit and serious ballroom dance competition of all time, with a lot of catchy lines and refrains throughout, including:

"I'm on your head, ice pack
Life is a bitch and she bite back".

As if the trio hasn't switched it up enough already, we have "How I'm Feeling", which is a slick combination of soul and pop rap, a smooth and sweet chorus from Jadagrace as well. It's very summertime, it's very driving around top down. But with lyrics that get to the heart of something, plus a funny refrain to close things out the song:

"Wit yo bitch ass
It's way too many bitches in this bitch".

"Thatsmycheck." is a very young and bouncy playful piece of TikTok trap, it sounds as trendy and commercial, as basically anything else in this lane. While it's not my vibe, it's certainly accurate, lots of other artists have popped off with this sort of thing, why not grouptherapy. Given everything that group has delivered thus far on this record, I'm not surprised that they would like to go for a track or two with some chart potential. What is surprising to me though is the song "Nasty", which sounds like a chart-topper from the 2000s, maybe an imaginary one, it's like if you took a few alt rappers from today and made them collaborate with Pharrell's N.E.R.D., but then you somehow also had Timbaland on the beat too, with some hits of foreign percussion and strings. One of the most hilarious and unhinged verses on the entire record shows up on this track:

"I'm a band member, homie got a few drumbs
And I'm like the tiny lollipop, I'm going two Dum's
...
Mask on the house, it's a Madvilla".

The versatility madness continues deeper into the tracklist. But somehow this thing still comes across cohesive as an album, even as the trio is bringing break beats and flares of industrial hip-hop, as well as some hyperpop touches on the vocals with "Hot!". Even a sad little acoustic cut that is a slightly Frank Ocean-esque on "Club Song", which is very much not a club song, at least sonically, the way the guitar and vocals come together, the whole thing sounds like a tender moment during a live action Disney drama, and that comparison is in the best way possible. "Peak" is one of the loveliest and grooviest moments, with watery keys, melancholy atmosphere and sparse little vocal hits, they feel like something out of a Drake beat. But then, behind that you have the peppy kicks that you would get from a Philly Club tune. Come to think of it this track feels like what you would get if "Honestly Nevermind" didn't suck. With a slick little R&B style chorus cool down that somehow doesn't derail the whole thing and goes to show how much grouptherapy are musical alchemists.

I do think the record hits a bit of a lull past this point. The following "TrunkPoppers.com", while not a terrible track, does feel like if Chance the Rapper's "Big Day" had a good track on it and that got cut out and was left on the cutting room floor. That's the best description I could give it. Then, you have "Help Pt. 1" and "Help Pt. 2" respectively, which come across like a couple of weird experimental cuts, where the trio is trying a bunch of half-baked ideas and weaving them together, doing some kooky shit on some Steve Lacy-esque bedroom rocks, some R&B fusion, some weirdo trap, some off-kilter anti-social boom bap. It sounds like several different songs all colliding into each other at once. And while it's not super well groomed or carefully crafted, it's neat that the trio can take even some odds and ends and turn them into something workable.

There are still some bangers to come toward the back end of the album. We have "Dysbf!" (or "Do Your Shit Best Friend!"), which sounds like a little cipher happening amongst a very large group of young people. I feel old saying that, but still that is what it is. With some fun, little verses laced in between those that are quite funny and see grouptherapy not taking themselves too seriously. Love that versatility, that emotional versatility as well, because there are moments where the trio does come across legitimately miffed or pissed, like they're getting to the core of something significant or introspective and serious. But then, in other times screwing around and sounding great doing that too. Then, to further illustrate my point, we have the closing track "Still Alive", which is an aspirational cut that's not about everything the group has done to get to this point, and the potential growth they could see from this moment forward in their careers, but it's also a track of survival and hoping to be meant for more than just as it said on the track "meant for more than a life, just shy of the gutter". Between those words and the subtle gospel influences, there's something truly heavenly and divine, I love the little encouraging outro at the very finish of the song. And there's something divine and heavenly about this being the ending for the record.

A fun, dynamic and entertaining well-crafted album from this trio. Not the most unique, because a lot of the places that grouptherapy pulls from are quite contemporary and quite obvious. But these three definitely bring a massive amount of talent to the table and combine their very clear influences in some pretty unique ways. Not to mention they are very much jacks of all trades and are doing a little bit of everything so well, and dishing out a lot of great songs with very good performances and good production in the process.

FAV TRACKS: SMILES, LIGHTSPEED, HOW I'M FEELING, NASTY, HOT, CLUB SONG, PEAK, FUNKFEST, DYSBF, STILL ALIVE
LEAST FAV TRACK: HELP PT. 2

DECENT 8
