High On Fire is a sludge, stoner, doom metal band from the California, and this is their 5th LP, but their discography stretches all the way back to the late 90's. High On Fire was founded by Matt Pike, ex guitarist from the band Sleep, who is quite possibly one of the most critically acclaimed groups in this genre of music. And you may rightfully be asking what the hell is doom metal? Well, whether it's drone, or sludge, or stoner, or whatever, all you have to do is listen for some really heavy guitar riffs, some basy low-end in the mix and some brutal production. And “Snakes for the Divine” really brings that even if it is to a lesser extent than High On Fire previous LPs like “The Art Of Self Defence”, which is their debut album and extremely generous with the bass in the mix. But for this record, High On Fire enlisted the help of Greg Fidelman who has produced the new Slayer record, done engineering for Metallica, engineering for Gossip. And with Greg, High On Fire has gone for a much cleaner approach on this album, making a mix that has a whole lot of clarity to it, a lot of balance and less emphasis on this punishing, grinding distorted low-end bass. And though this could easily be seen as a shift away from their doom roots and their doom metal influences, High On Fire most definitely does not skimp out on the raw emotion of their earlier records. There are a lot of tempo changes on this album, and I would argue some faster playing too that I think would get drown out, would get buried if you had a muddier or thicker or more low-end mix. There are a lot of quick subtleties that just whizzed by especially in the drum fills too.

Though this LP has its moments, it's kind of a turn away from some of the doom metal influences that High On Fire has basically grown up on, like Black Sabbath, Saint Vitus, Trouble. However, the really dast drumming, the fiery solos aren't a bad replacement. Plus, with this record High On Fire really embraces their love of Motorhead, and we all know that that's not a bad thing.

A couple more things I'm really digging about this LP are Matt Pike's really raw vocals. Even though there are some moments where I wish the guitars were a little beefier, a little bit higher in the mix to sort of bury his vocals kind of counteract them a bit. I have to give thumbs up to how much emotion there is in his voice, even if that emotion is primarily anger.

The song structures are really great too, some of these tracks top 8 minutes and they most definitely justify those songs lengths not feeling drawn out, not feeling boring, really keeping up the pace and making things interesting. And of course, I think the most vital characteristic to High On Fire are the riffs — though, they're kind of simple, straightforward, maybe you could say generic — they're very pivotal to the band, it's important that they're straightforward, it's important that they're simple. High On Fire riffs are kind of like a battle-axe, I guess you could say. It doesn't take a rocket scientist to figure out how to use it, but it's a big heavy object with a sharp end on it, and I will crush any skull that you put up against it. It's got enough variety to actually sit down to this album and listen to it in one sitting and yet there's enough consistency there to make it feel like a High On Fire record, even if this thing is a bit of a stylistic change from their previous release.

For me, I think my only gripe was that some tracks really pale in comparison to others, but even my least favorite moments on this LP aren't that much less enjoyable than my favorite moments on this LP. I give a high recommendation to anybody who's a fan of doom metal, Black Sabbath, Motorhead — just any metal fan in general should definitely check this out for a less technical and more visceral approach to this type of music.

DECENT 8