Woods is a Brooklyn funk band who for every year, for the past five years, they've been racking up a new album. And instead of burning out and pretty much destroying their sound, they've built a pretty decent following for their music. And what the sound of this? Well, imagine a combination of folk and psychedelic rock with very creepy falsetto vocals. There's a raw recording style to this album too, it sounds like something you might hear in your head if you were stranded out in the middle of the forest at midnight and you had no clue where you were and you were bordering on insanity. And about the falsetto vocals that I just mentioned a second ago, they're pretty much the deal-breaker for this group for a lot of people, turn some people on, turn some people off. I mean, the falsetto vocals here aren't exactly tiny tim proportioned, but I'm on the opinion that they're pretty freakin good and they give Woods a very unique sound. I feel like the vocals set a unique mood for this band, but I'm sure it could be argued all day as to whether or not they're actually all that good. But what you can't argue about is that this album is way more straightforward and concise than their previous effort "Songs of Shame". Which if you guys remember I gave a pretty high score to on this channel when I reviewed it. And "Songs of Shame" still haunts me to this day, with melodies that just sometimes I wish I could just exercise from my brain.

And "At Echo Lake" is doing the same thing, but maybe on a more miniscule level. If "Songs of Shame" is midnight, then "At Echo Lake" is like 4:30 or 5:00 a.m. in the morning: it's still dark outside, but still the sun is coming up, there's some twilight up there, there's sunrise light on the horizon. Because there's some more upbeat sounds on "At Echo Lake" and a lot of variation too. But would still stay true to their sound, there even some tracks on here that pretty much sound like songs off of "Songs of Shame", I'm pretty sure the track "Til the Sun Rips" has the same exact chord progression as "Rain On".

But there are some sounds that come out of nowhere. Like "Blood Dries Darker", which sounds like a honky tonk-esque piece of folk rock. And the track "Morning Time", I'm not exactly sure how to place it, sounds a little bit glam-ish, maybe a little bit of The Beatles influence in there, I'm not completely sure. But it definitely sounds like something that could be a piece of 60s radio pop. There's a little less reverb on these tracks. And what I'm also liking is that the band gets a little braver in the production department, throwing in some more sounds, some chimes of experimental drum edits. There's definitely more texture on "At Echo Lake" than there is on "Songs of Shame" for sure. This album is just a lot of fun, it's immediate.

But my one gripe with this album is, the same that it was with "Songs of Shame", that the tracks are maybe a little too short and just not fleshed out enough. I did find myself gravitating toward the longer songs on this album than I did the shorter ones. And imagine how hard that was for me, because overall this album is shorter than its predecessor by 7 or 6 minutes. The songs here aren't that expansive, they fly in, touchdown, stick around to just lay down a basic idea, maybe throw a solo. And there are some interlude and then they just shoot off into the distance, waiting for the next song to come in. Which you could see is nothing getting done or nothing getting old, and I'm more of the opinion of the latter. And even though there's not a world of difference between this LP and "Songs of Shame", Woods has a distinct sound that no other group out there right now has, so it's hard to get sick of them, because you don't hear a bunch of repeat groups out there right now.

But I will warn casual listeners too, Woods will probably not see a difference between "At Echo Lake" and "Songs of Shame". But if you've listened to "Songs of Shame" enough to have those tracks infect your head, then you're most definitely going to hear that there is at least enough difference between these two albums to make "At Echo Lake" worthy. This LP is a little shorter and it borders on being maybe too straightforward and I'm diggin it maybe just a little bit less than the last album.

LIGHT 8
