This guy is a California beat music producer, as well as DJ, whose music thrives within the worlds of glitch hop, instrumental hip hop, as well as turntablism. I've been following the guy's work for a little while, first caught on to him in 2009 I believe when he released a compilation of tracks called “All Killer”, on label that just like releases B quality music, just rarities. While, I do wish he was a little bit more experimental or just a little bit more adventurous with the way he sampled things, maybe manipulating the samples a little bit more. From here, it was just totally clear that The Gaslamp Killer is really thriving off the legacy of albums, like “Endtroducing…” for example. Later down the road, he had two pretty solid EPs on Brainfeeder records, the second which I definitely recommend. But when I really fell for this guy's work and got interested in him was when he made that collaborative LP with Gonjasufi “A Sufi and a Killer” in 2010. Just a lot of unique textures, sounds and and source materials, just nice beats. Again, there were moments that when I kind of dug through what I found to be the source material for some of these tracks, yeah you know maybe things could have been manipulated more, maybe things could have been sampled more creatively. But you know, this is kind of what The Gaslamp Killer is, he is just a master crit digger.

Now, everything The Gaslamp Killer has been releasing musically has been building up to this. The profile of his label Brainfeeder records has been growing over the past couple years too. I mean, him and veter are really icons when it comes to a certain musical scene right now. And I don't think that this LP disappoints. In my opinion, it's actually one of the more ambitious LPs I've heard come off a “Brainfeeder” so far. Throughout the 17 tracks on this LP, The Gaslamp Killer actually pulls together some pretty distinct tracks of different shapes, sizes, sounds and textures, styles and complexities too. And he does it with an array of guest musicians, producers and Gonjasufi hops on a couple tracks too. The Gaslamp Killer brings on beat, like Dimlite and Computer Jay and Shigeto and Daedelus. He also brings on live instrumentation from people like RSI on this LP. And there are some Brainfeeder cohorts on here as well, like Miguel Atwood-Ferguson and Samiyam as well. And there's more where that came from, I mean there's just a really hefty guest list on this album, which helps bring some amazing variety to these songs.

The introduction on this LP is kind of a musical collage, just like nothing but create dark magic, kind of overlapping, fed through this psychedelic fog, it really kind of sets a dark weird mad-scientist assemble tone for the album. Gonjasufi kind of does his thing on the next track over a string sample, not an incredibly developed track, but it does kind of get the flavor out there, you know there are quite a few moments on here that do not feel developed by traditional standards. However, dudes like J Dilla, Madlib and of course Flying Lotus have proven the power and in kind of delivering albums with this more ADD oriented style, jumping from one idea to the next. And I'm not necessarily against a one or two minute motif or beat or anything like that, as long as the artist can make something impactful or moving or memorable, meaningful within the short amount of time that they've given themselves.

I really dig the track “Holy Mt Washington”, which has these really, just loud, pounding, sharp, crisp drums, backed up with these just very eerie string shots and then kind of a strange whistle really kind of hanging in the ambiance in the background. I like the juxtaposition of the instruments on this track, it's really like just some bitter and moody ear candy. The gasps the Killer brings on some guests for the track “Dead Vets”, which is like some psychedelic hip-hop infused funk. But things get really layered and complex and detailed on the track “Flange Face” with with Miguel Atwood-Ferguson, where you have The Gaslamp Killer delivering these just heavy drums, synthetic, distorted muck, with some synthesizers, and Ferguson just lays on these wonderful strings that have kind of a middle-eastern quality to them, but at times they kind of start dripping down the wall, like droplets of blood in a horror movie. That's one of the longer tracks on the album and it's kind of epic peaks like that, that really in my eyes justify the smaller and shorter moments, it's like you kind of have these well develop giants and then these shorter, little morsels and beats hanging around them, maybe buzzing around them like flies. It gives the album an interesting flow, a disjointed, but interesting flow. There's always just kind of like a surprise turn about to happen, and I like that.

The track he does with Daedelus is another darken and moody number. And I love the really bouncy keyboard arpeggios that come off that they sound like they almost have kind of like an 8-bit quality to them or something like that me, just something videogame about them. I love the two tracks that close this thing out, “Seven Years of Bad Luck for Fun” is a great track, really glitchy, really tortured. And the closer “In the Dark…” goes six minutes and stays engaging throughout, it's really climactic finish for this LP and kind of wraps things up, brings things together, it's kind of like it tells you everything and then it reminds you of what it just told you on this last track, with some very spacious, progressive synthesizers and the strings come backing as well, the drums are heavy and just the mood is so thick you can cut it with a knife, just really tense.

Are there negatives on this LP? For sure. There are tracks that I feel are kind of forgettable or maybe didn't have that impact in the short amount of time that The Gaslamp Killer gives himself to make these tracks, like the Samiyam track for example, which I didn't really get a strong emotional pull from. But that's part of the reason I do like a lot of the tracks on this album, because they just have such a strong emotional vibe to them. This album definitely has a really heavy and dark quality to it, lots of texture, lots of great production, I feel like a lot of people may get kind of annoyed with how disjointed this album can be. And certainly a lot of the talent and a lot of the interesting ideas that come up on this album are outsourced through a very long series of guest musicians.

LIGHT 8
