The Drums are a New York outfit and I've been listening to so much New York music that my ears are going to rot off. But no, it's ain't that bad. These guys have been building a lot of buzz since 2009 on thin jangly drum machine pop with very reverbed vocals. In 2009 they released the "Summertime!"" EP and that thing had songs like "Let's Go Surfin'" spreading across the music blogosphere like the herp. And I wasn't the biggest fan of that EP to be quite honest, didn't see what the buzz was about behind the whole thing. Though, I did like a few tracks off of it. And because I wasn't totally in love with that thing, I was surprised to find 2 tracks from that EP made the cut on to the new album. Thankfully, there were songs off the EP that I liked, and they do sound slightly remixed in some cases on this new album.

And what can you expect if you listened to this thing? For one, simplicity. Some of these tracks are so stripped down, so skeletal, so bare-bones that they make Wire's "Pink Flag" look like an orchestra suite. There's a real lack of warmth and low-end throughout this entire album, and it's no wonder, no bass guitar. Also, the drum machine sounds so tinny, it puts the word tin into tinnitus. However, that sonic hollowness is more than made up for with strong as hell hooks, they give these songs a real first listen memorability with lots of pretty melodies and steady beats that are worth swaying your shoulders to. Plus, I'm no stranger to the type of sound that you're going to find on this LP, it's nothing that hasn't been done before by groups like The Smiths, Joy Division or even New Order when they were making stuff around the time of Low-Life". Also The Cure, also surf rock a little bit.

My gripes about the album, the double guitar, the drums and the vocal combination don't exactly add up to a lot of variation. There's quite a bit of sonic sameness on this album. However, I'd say the hooks are good enough to be able to pull one song apart from the other. But still, if you're looking for a significant change past the one or two tracks that you may have already heard from this album, that's not going to happen. I can see this turning other people off, so I'm going to warn you. However, it didn't bug me, but there is an extremely persistent whininess on the vocals of this album, a lot of cracked vocals, some flat notes. However, I find the emotion that Jonny Pierce brings to these songs, just captivating, just makes the flat notes, all that other stuff for me, just irrelevant. If you're a vocal purist, if you like your vocals on key, you like them concise, this may not be the release for you. But if you're looking for something that is more emotional than it is on key, something bright, light and summery, something that's going to make New Order, Joy Division and The Smiths fans warm where it counts, painfully emotional and about as straightforward as a punch to the face, it's extreme pop simplicity, it's The Drums' self-titled full-length you should be putting your ears on.

LIGHT 8
