Death Grips is an experimental hip-hop trio, consisting of Zach Hill on drums, also known for his work in groups such as Hella and his solo work, MC Ride on vocals and Flatlander. And collectively they create some of the most paranoid, abstract, abrasive and tortured music on the planet. My first introduction to their music was last year when they dropped an, EP a collection of tracks that, in comparison with their next release, was a little rough around the edges, but still had a pretty definitive sound, it wasn't really love at fifth or sixth listen, until I listened to their debut album/mixtape “Exmilitary”. With the popularity that gained behind these guys, thanks to “Exmilitary” in 2011, Death Grips entered 2012 with the announcement that they had signed to Epic Records and would be dropping two full-length albums this year. In the first of those two, which dropped around Record Store Day of this year was “The Money Store”. And to me, “The Money Store” was much of what I was hearing on “Exmilitary”, but just like the next-level — busier, glitchier, more fractured and yet more detailed production, sometimes a wash and very fat distorted synthesizers on tracks like “Black Jack”, or “Lost Boys”. And yet, there were other songs on there that were pretty lean, pretty punchy, hard-hitting and extremely catchy. I mean, viral hooks, like “I've Seen Footage”, the song that in my opinion from what I can see, people reference the most, and maybe my favorite track off the LP, “The Fever”. And the lyrics to me on that LP became more potent as well, just as potent as the production diving further into Death Grips themes of fear, schizophrenia, excess addiction, violence. The success of “The Money Store” made Death Grips second full-length album of this year to be one of the most anticipated LPs of 2012. And they kind of teased toward it, with a really epic marketing campaign, kind of sending fans on this internet scavenger hunt, filtering through pictures and encoded files that was even a point where some people went to New York at 3 a.m. to hang around a payphone, which was ringing, it was a message. It was kind of weird. And all of this just so people could find out background on the new album, on Death Grips and get some “The Money Store” instrumentals. But the momentum on this scavenger hunt kind of slowed down, but kind of simultaneously Death Grips says “our label has pushed back our release date, we are going to let you hear it the same day the label is going to hear, on October 1st you are going to hear “NO LOVE DEEP WEB”. And when I say the label pushed back the release date, I mean allegedly, because a lot of “facts” haven't really come out of this whole situation. Because on October 1st early-early in the morning, Death Grips threw “NO LOVE DEEP WEB” up onto YouTube and SoundCloud, they threw down a bunch of file sharing websites. But it seemed that Death Grips label wasn't really doing anything and the only alleged action the label took was taking the band's website, which wasn't even really down for that long. And then, the label later that day made an official statement saying they had nothing to do with the takedown of Death Grips site, which if that is true, maybe the takedown had something more to do with downloads or traffic or the fact that their album cover was blown up gigantic on the front page of their site, which was a penis. “Leaking” their album in the way that Death Grips did, certainly brought them 10 times more press than a normal release ever would have. Even Billboard's website reported that legally letting people download their album for free put Death Grips at the top of BitTorrent legally downloaded music chart, putting them at about 30 million downloads. And when you think about the line of exactly what happened up to the release of “NO LOVE DEEP WEB”, maybe you could potentially question the truthiness of Death Grips. And maybe some people are offended by that, but the thing is I don't really go to Death Grips for the truth necessarily, more for the gross amplifications of the darker side of human nature.

And Death Grips' music and their artistic actions embrace that ideology and the thought that they would use their fame to mess with the people that are listening to them is completely in line with the ideology that the band has been putting forth through their music. To kind of just give a basic rundown of this album, I have to say this is Death Grips' most sonically stripped-down album, but simultaneously they're lyrically darkest and most intense.

Now, as far as the production goes on this thing, it is way less busy in comparison to even the band's first EP all the way up to “The Money Store”. The samples are cut down to a minimum as far as I could tell, one of the only tracks that immediately comes to mind is having a pretty bold sample in the hook. There is like “Whammy”. There are a lot of 808 drum sounds on this record. There are occasionally shots of Zach Hills drums, but for the most part you are listening to 808 drum tambors. And on top of those 808 for the most part are just synthesizers of various shapes and sizes, but Flatlander assuming that he's playing all the synths on this entire LP, really keeps them sounding electronic and synthetic, he doesn't distort them, doesn't make them sound really gritty or grimy, not to the extent that we have heard them on previous Death Grips releases. In a way it's great, because the production is just him back a little bit, just to kind of put MC right in the forefront and on some tracks here he just takes the amount of energy that he's been delivering on previous releases and amps it up even higher.

I mean, this LP features some of his most aggressive and paranoid performances and lyrics yet. The track “Come Up and Get Me” has the series of lyrics with MC Ride talking about like being locked away in this underground basement torture chamber, where he can't really seem to find the way out and he's, because of being in this torture chamber where he is going insane, he's kind of like accepted death, like I'm just gonna die. But simultaneously, he fears it. The track “Hunger Games” lyrically goes into schizophrenia, suffering from it, because of not taking your medication and becoming very violent, maybe losing control because of it. And the track “No Love” is has some of the most stomach-churning lyrics on this entire LP, kind of really talking about some pretty torturous acts. There's a moment where MC Ride raps about the person who was the victim here whimpering as he checks his phone. There is just kind of like an element of addiction to this abuse that's being painted here and in a way it could kind of be like a figurative image of how the relationship works between Death Grips and their fans in a way. And then, there is the last track “Artificial Death in the West”, which lyrically is one of the more abstract tracks that Death Grips has ever dropped, making lyrical references to suicide, seeing your own death, being watched again, and I just love the beat on that track set to this click-clack 808 beat and these very icy synthesizers sound like they would be in like an 80s sci-fi film. It's just bringing MC Ride forward and in a way it's kind of deflated the very viral hooks that were all over “The Money Store”.

Not that there aren't hooks or refrains here, it's just that there are a lot of tracks that musically don't explode when it comes to the hook. Tracks, like “Lil Boy” or “Hunger Games”, “Black Dice”, “Artificial Death in the West”, “Stockton” too, just pretty much have MC Ride just going from the verse straight to the chorus without a lot of change from the instrumentation behind him, either a lot of change or just not really the explosion of the climax that usually comes with a chorus in a song with a verse chorus verse structure. There are tracks on here that are a little more exuberant hook-wise, like “Whammy” and “Bass Rattle Stars Out the Sky”, which really kind of sounds like the 80s on bath salts. But even those tracks instrumentally are not as hard hitting as instrumentals from previous Death Grips LPs, and I kind of feel like in a way this record was a challenge to kind of stick to some more basic elements, but try to make a record that is just as frightening, as gritty. I do think Death Grips managed to pull together some of their best instrumentals so far. Again, the track “Bass Rattle Stars Out the Sky”, which I just mentioned, has such a hard-hitting click clack beat that I love and just that synth on the track. The track “No Love” has its really heavy, lumbering beat. And the song “Lil Boy” has this multi-phase instrumental that is always changing as the song moves from one section to another. And though it took a little while to kind of grow on me, I do like that little synth.

There are moments like that where I kind of feel like I'm getting a bit of a dance music element from the synthesizers, which did kind of turn me off at first. The track “Lock Your Doors” is really murky, kind of hectic, sounds like a riot is going on or something like that. And really one of my favorite instrumentals on this entire thing has got to be one of the most spacious and that's “Hunger Games”. I mean, such a weird, like lopsided instrumental, just sounds like a mutant.

There are a few instrumentals that didn't really kind of make it for me completely. I thought the track “Pop” had a pretty weak hook on it, even for this LP. Honestly, I gotta say “Deep Web”, that instrumental really did not do well with me. Though I did think the distorted synth was cool and that same distortion kind of shows up on other tracks here, I didn't really get “woop-woop” moments. That kind of placed through the track and that to me is just like kills the mood, the very dark tortured mood of the song. And I didn't really like MC Ride's flow on that track either, the pacing of the song was just kind of meh.

And I guess as long as I'm complaining, bringing MC Ride to the forefront has done wonders for this LP and definitely made it stick out Death Grips short, but growing discography. But with bringing him forward has revealed some lyrics that either weren't really translating all that well for me or maybe I just had a difficult time extending the poetic license that far. Like, on the song “World of Dogs”, which has this line where he drops “I'm dying; die with me”. Or the other line on “Deep Web”, where he says something to the note of “Hate myself more than you ever could”, and that line about “I'm the coat hanger in your man's vagina”. I'm not sure how much I should read into that. And to go back to “World of Dogs”, the hook on that track “It's all suicide, it's all suicide, it's all suicide”, it just seems a little flat to me. But there are some lyrics, especially with the last verse with “mountains of teeth” and “spit out the leash” that is like epic. Though, I do bring some things up the lyrical potholes on this record for me are very few and far between.

The production is good here, it is interesting here, but I do wish it was more colourful of course, I do wish there were more interesting sounds. But I do feel like MC Ride does a great job of filling in that void, and that's what made this LP a success to me, even though I didn't love it as much as “The Money Store”. There were just a few tracks along the way that I didn't really dig all too much.

DECENT 8
