Janelle Monae is a singer, songwriter, dancer a real triple threat. This is her debut full-length album and this thing has gotten some heavy votes inside the modbox since I put that thing on the YouTube channel. But I sat on the review and didn't do it as maybe soon as I should have. And maybe that was because of fear, an irrational fear, like how some people fear going to the dentist, even though it's not that bad, the fear of trying something new. Because Monae is Grammy nominated, she is on P Diddy's record label and she's also been featured on American Idol, a lot of uncharted territory for my reviews, not exactly the type of music I'm usually talking about. But to be honest, once I jumped into this LP, it wasn't bad. And here's how bad it wasn't. Despite all the mainstream hype in big-time musicians surrounding Monae as of late, do not take this LP for your average pop album. In fact, most of the tracks don't even follow a normal pop structure, but that's besides the point. This thing is more conceptual, intricate and colorful than most of the indie albums I've heard this year, and totally spits in the face of the idea that, as you get more popular, you have to water down your art. This thing is a big-time production, has more credits on it than a feature-length film. And it's definitely not an album for putting on the high five and leaving it alone and going about and washing your dishes and eating your food and petting your cat. To fully appreciate this you have to sit down on the edge of your seat and take in all of its twists and turns instrumentally and emotionally. Because this thing is all over the place, in a good way, because hip-hop, jazz, motown, funk, contemporary R&B and orchestral pop — all survive in harmony among these 18 tracks.

This album's stylistic shifts keep things feeling fresh and engaging, and nothing feels out of place, except for the of Montreal collaboration on "Make the Bus", which is pretty much done in the band's usual over eccentric style. It's not that big of a pothole in the ride. And ride is probably the best analogy I can come up with for this album. Especially in the first half, which I neglected up until this point to mention, but this LP is actually split into two suites — the second and third of a four-part series. Which is not complete right now, but the first part came out in an EP before this. But anyway, a ride.

The first suite of this LP is incredibly fluid, with one song oozing into the next, you can't tell where one starts and one ends, one thing jumping into another. The first half of this album does emphasize a more straightforward approach, taking a lot of influence from guys like Michael Jackson, Prince and James Brown, a lot of upbeat, funky and brassy tracks. And even the slower numbers on the first sweep, for me they're just too immediate to deny. The first half has its moments of experimentation, but it's mostly catchy tunes. The second part of this LP, the third suite is actually where things get a little weird. The longest tracks are in the third suite, the songs are way more abstract and linear, not repeating a lot of hooks, a lot of string sections. And there's even one moment where the strings section is playing the melody from Willy Wonka and the Chocolate Factory's "Pure Imagination". I'm surprised I haven't heard a lot of people talking about it, but the thing is it's either the melody or it's so close to the melody that it's definitely inspiration or some reference. And considering that this LP would lift a melody from Willy Wonka and the Chocolate Factory, from Pure Imagination" specifically, I feel it embraces The ArchAndroid's whole notion of fantasy. It definitely works with the imaginative aesthetic that the lyrics dabbling.

But of course, "The ArchAndroid" isn't all sci-fi and futurism and androids. There's some love songs in here to soften the blow. But overall, the third suite is a real mixed bag and save some of its weirdest parts for the end. Like on the 9 minute "BabopbyeYa", which is full of jazz improvisations and 007 orchestrations, it's possibly one of the most ambitious moments on this LP. But may go sort of unnoticed, because it's so long, it's strung out and it's at the end of the album. But to go back to what I said about ambition, this thing has oodles of it. And maybe it's to the point where it may turn off some listeners. Because if you like your pop, simple, sweet and straightforward, this thing may not be the most easygoing album of 2010. But for a concept album, it's playful, it's fun and it's thrilling.

My original gripe about this LP, or my first reaction to it, is that I didn't like it, or I wasn't going to like it. And the reason I felt that way was mostly because the sound, the production, the quality of this recording sounds very much like a modern or contemporary R&B recording you may hear on commercial radio, which is not my thing. However, though this thing sounds very modern, though it has a very new studio sound and it sounds like she recorded in a studio that she had access to because she's on P Diddy's record label, it sounds like it was recorded in that context. But still, the songwriting is fantastic, this thing does not forget the fundamentals of jazz and motown. It's everything I love about these older styles of music, but put into a much more updated context. And thrown together with very android-based subplot.

There's tons of stuff in terms of concepts and ideas that I could talk about, and even relate it to Fritz Lang's "Metropolis". And I could be asking all day "what does this lyric mean?". For me, that's more of a personal adventure that one has to make interpreting all these things. And I could be talking about how famous Janelle Monae is getting and about how a lot of people are singing the overhyped blues. But that is a bunch of outside contextual stuff that doesn't need to be discussed. I'm here to vouch for the music. And I can say, beyond the shadow of the doubt in my opinion, the music on this album is good. Very, very good. In fact, it's excellent.

STRONG 8
