Buke & Gase is a musical duo from New York, this is their second full-length LP. And I will most, sure, for certainly, definitely, be the first to admit that for quite a while since their debut LP I've always dismissed this project. Not publicly, but sort of personally, thinking that maybe they were a little too enthralled with their homemade instruments, to the point where they would name their musical project after them. That sort of thing screams the word "gimmick" to me. And despite the fact that they may have been able to conjure some semi unique sounds with the instruments that they made, ultimately the question comes up is there as much attention being paid toward the music and the songwriting. That was my perception, that was my attitude toward their first album. But I gave this new LP of there an honest-to-god shot and was pleasantly surprised. Because what I ended up finding on this LP was a lot of improvement and a lot of appeal.

For one, the production, the sound, the overall sound, recording on this LP is loads better, no longer does Buke & Gase sound as tattered and worn as their homemade setup is strung together with maybe a little bit of tape, some screws and some daisy-chained effects pedals. And what's come through in the process of maybe me giving them a better try and hearing a better recording is that these guys have essentially revealed themselves as being a pretty unique and interesting noise pop project. They have strong sense of eccentricity, a penchant for very strange angular melodies, a lot like Deerhoof, maybe not in the same exact way, but the way that they write melodies, the way they come out so sharp. There are also moments where the tone and the dissonance and the strangeness, the chaos reminds me of like Micachu in the shapes without the British swagger or post-punk influence. And there are other moments where I'm feeling a strong Dirty Projectors vibe coming, especially from the guitar riffs and lines and melodies. There isn't that virtuous flash from the playing that you would usually get on a Dirty Projectors record, but the melodies and the writing on this album are no less dizzying and maze-like.

Buke & Gase has idiosyncratic approach toward writing melodies and structuring songs with one phase after another. But yet, it all comes together, verses and choruses is so damn impenetrable. And yet, it's so odd and sharp sounding overall that I can't help but pay attention to it, it is attention demanding. Beside for maybe the soft interlude in the middle of "Contortion in Training". Very little about this LP comes off as being smooth. One track after another, you're getting all these staccato guitar riffs and leads that hammer away mechanically. Right underneath Arone Dyer's, I'll use this word again, very sharp feminine voice, it's got a nice twang to it, not a southern twang, but it hangs in this certain pitch range that a lot like the guitars is sitting in this register where you can't help, but pay attention to it, it is like onion freakin abnormal. Which may be annoying to some people, especially if they're looking for music that will help them chill out, relax, this is very much not in that mood.

To me, this new Buke & Gase LP instead is more an imaginative crossroad between the hard-hitting and straight rigid sounds of industrial combined with stomping, hollering, hootenanny party attitude. Especially on the track "Hiccup", which has thumping drums on it, a lot of dissonant background guitar plays, some bassy and patient guitar riffs, which are laying a nice solid rhythmic foundation, have a very grinding sandpaper rough quality to them. Buke & Gase definitely conjure up a very dense array of sounds for just two people with some homemade instruments. The title track is just guitar noises upon guitar noises and over that are all these weird leads. And when they kick in with these thick strung chords that are so freakin dissonant on top of this, it's like this downward spiral into sour tones. There are these swaths of chromatically ascending guitar leads on the track "Twisting the Lasso of Truth", which totally earns its freakin title. And it feels like this insanely maniacal take on circus music. However, my one issue with the track is that it doesn't develop past the climax of this one really good musical idea that it presents.

And there are a few other tracks on here, like the closing track, that do feel like that. Buke & Gase are more interested in doing this weird experiment than they are actually crafting song. But most of the time on this album, in their own weird little way Buke & Gase are bringing some catchy, melodic, weirdly melodic verse-chorus-verse tracks that sound like an old airplane engine on its last leg, topped with guitar leads that burn their way into my eardrums, mainly on the track "Hard Times".

There is a nice sense of variety among these tracks, they don't get that album arc or sort of an obvious progression or anything like that, especially with two strangely placed interlude tracks. But like I said, there are differences and feel among these songs, there are slower tracks, faster tracks, denser tracks, more sparse tracks, louder, softer, but nothing on here purely comes off as sweet, straightforward or basic. Which is also praise, but also warning as well for those who may be looking for that thing. Because as fun as this album is to listen to for me, I will admit that to an extent it does sound samey-samey with the errands relying on their same instruments over and over. I mean, rarely do they break out of the ritual of relying on their Buke & Gase to make these songs work. But you would figure considering in the name of the group. There are moments where keyboards come in, maybe a few gentler guitar tones, there's even a spot that sticks out because it's got auto-tune on it. But it's not in the way you usually see auto-tune getting used, these guys take an eccentric approach toward executing with that, just like they do the guitar and bass.

So even though this album is a little bit of a gauntlet at a short 42 minutes, I did love listening to it, it is an odd gift, it's a fun puzzle, it's catchy, yet challenging, it's a friendly conundrum, it is a joyous racket.

FAV TRACKS: HOUDINI CRUSH, HICCUP, GENERAL DOME, HARD TIMES, MY BEST ANDRE SHOT, CYCLOPEAN
LEAST FAV TRACK: METAZOA

DECENT 8
