This band is fronted by singer, songwriter Nathan Williams who also plays guitar. And in 2008 he came out with album titled "Wavvves", and it was like almost self-titled, but it had three V's in it instead of just the normal amount of Vs that are in the word waves. Since then, he's been touring to the brink of insanity and released a couple songs with Zach Hill of Hella. And he most recently has picked up Jay Reatard's old band to back things up on drums and bass. This is Wavves third album and it's like a change, it's like a big change. It's something that maybe is gonna take off all the lo-fi fanatics. That's the attitude you gotta have with this LP.

So, this ain't like a thinking man's record. No, not that you don't need a brain to enjoy it, not that you need to be brainless to enjoy it. It's a good way just to turn the old noggin off for like 30 minutes and just rock. So long story short, if you're not turning this up and thrashing about, you're doing it wrong. With a more pristine studio quality this time around, the hooks stand out so strong on this LP, it's partially the production. Overall, the songwriting is a little bit better too. The chorus from the track "Take on the World" sounds like a post-punk Beach Boys melody. The opening "King of the Beach" is a perfect start to this album, just trebled, hot, distorted burning chords, heavy drums, it's fantastic.

And there's some soft, sentimental songs on this thing too. Like "When Will You Come" and "Baseball Cards", a couple tracks with some very subdued rhythms and even some synthesizers show up in the mix. There's some real dynamics among these tracks. I may not love every single song, but still this thing is a lot more varied and engaging than Wavves' last release. And part of what makes this record such a fun experience is that Nathan lets his influences pour through on this LP. I'm not surprised that he's working with Jay Reatards' old band, because they're pulling from a similar punk aesthetic. And I'm feeling a huge skate punk and pop punk influence on this thing: from the old school, like Screeching Weasel, The Queers, The Mr. T Experience. I just can't get away from that vibe.

And though, this is one of the most visceral records I've heard all year and contains lyrics about being an idiot, people hating your guts and not giving a shit, this is the most mature Wavves has ever sounded.

My one major gripe is that it falls apart on several tracks for me. For example, on "Mickey Mouse", "Baseball Cards", those tracks are very subdued, have a draw machine and I just do not like this music backed up with a drum machine, it just knocks the wind out of this record, loses the momentum on it and just pulls the guts out of it. And the song "Convertible Balloon" feels like swallowing a giant ball of corn and almost choking to death on it.

Should you be taking this seriously? There's a cat smoking a jay on the cover. No, you shouldn't be taking it too seriously. You should be putting this on, enjoying the vibes, enjoying how loud it is, how ballsy it is and just sort of don't think.

FAV TRACKS: KING OF THE BEACH, SUPER SOAKER, TAKE ON THE WORLD, IDIOT

CHILL 8
